# App Design and UX

> **Category Description:** UI/UX design principles, addictive app psychology, gamification strategies, and design techniques that make apps stand out. Covers everything from beginner mistakes to senior-level design patterns, plus the psychology behind habit-forming apps.

---

## Table of Contents

- 1. 4 levels of UI UX design (and BIG mistakes to avoid)
- 2. Every UI UX Concept Explained in Under 10 Minutes
- 3. How I Design Apps 10x Better (Free Course)
- 4. Designing Addiction  The Twisted Psychology Of Game Design
- 5. How Addictive Apps Are Made
- 6. How Apps Are Designed to Keep YOU ADDICTED
- 7. The Secret Behind Weirdly Addictive Apps
- 8. The Weird Science of Apps You Can't Stop Using
- 9. How to Make Learning as Addictive as Social Media   Duolingo's Luis Von Ahn   TED


---

## 1. 4 levels of UI UX design (and BIG mistakes to avoid)

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_4 levels of UI_UX design (and BIG mistakes to avoid).txt` | **Size:** 12.7 KB

---

I've designed apps and websites for over a decade. And when I look back at my own design journey, one thing is clear. There are patterns to the kinds of mistakes you make as a designer at every level of your career. In this video, I will highlight those patterns of mistakes, what they are, when they typically happen, and how to fix them so that you can reach your next design level faster. Here's how we'll do it. We will take a screen from a real client project in my agency portfolio and redesign it starting from an unpaid beginner level, iterating all the way to a high ticket senior level. For each level, we will call out the biggest mistakes while providing resources and guidelines so that you can avoid them.

And then by the end of the video, we'll dig into a hidden mistake that even lots of senior designers make and a solution that can really set you apart in this AI era that we're in. Let's get started. So, at the beginner level, nothing works. However, this isn't a surprise since we have less than a year of experience and we're not getting paid for our work yet. But let's dive into why it doesn't work. The first mistake in this design is something as simple as the copyrightiting. For example, do we really need four words to communicate a user's rewards? And does it make sense for the button to be about earning tokens when the action is actually about claiming voting rewards?

Clarity is key in copyrightiting, and we're not really nailing it here. Therefore, it's a fail on the first principle, which brings us to the visuals. Lots of beginners will overuse flashy gradients, blur effects, and other cool visual techniques like that. And to be fair, even mid-level designers do this, but the difference is that they make it work. More on that later. The best quick tip I can give here is if you're unsure, opt for simplicity instead of flashiness. A simple but clear graph will help a user much more than a fancy graph that is hard to understand. In this case, since we went for fancy and we couldn't pull it off,

it's a fail. But what about the colors? First off, we're using too much of a very strong red color, which makes the UI straight up stressful to look at. Everything here is screaming for attention and therefore nothing gets attention. Not even the things we want to highlight in the UI. Now to make coloring a bit easier, try the 603010 approach. 60% of the UI is a neutral color like white or light gray. 30% of the UI is a complimentary color like black and 10% of the UI has the main brand color in this case red. This UI feels more like a reverse at the moment. And while that could work here it doesn't. Now however it's time to count the font sizes.

1 2 3 4 5 6. Six different font sizes are used here and four different font weights. It's impossible to create a greatl looking UI with this much variety in the text department. So here's the easy fix. Try to reduce those numbers that we just talked about six and four by at least two. So four sizes and two weights. That will take you really far. In this case though, it's a fail. But we're not done. We don't need to look super closely to see that things aren't really aligned in here. And the things that are aligned are spaced out randomly. 11 pixels here, 25 pixels here, just random numbers. So, here's a little trick to improve spacing quickly.

It's called the eightoint grid system. The main idea is that anytime you use a number in your design, make it divisible by 8 or 4. Instead of 25 pixels, use 24. Instead of 11, use 12. I actually have a full video on this that you can check out after this one linked down in the description below. Anyways, unfortunately, we fail here as well. That's six out of six fails. A pretty rough start. Surprisingly though, lots of progress happens with just one year of design obsession. Which brings us to the junior designer. But before we go there, if you want to learn from even more realworld projects, you can check out a full case study of this and other projects that we've designed at SIPAP in the link I've shared down in the description below.

Now, time for the junior designer. Here we have a person with one, two, maybe 3 years of experience designing apps and websites. They're likely either working in-house somewhere or making anywhere from a hundred to maybe 500 bucks, doing smaller design gigs as a freelancer. And usually copywriting is still a big issue at this level. We still add unnecessary words and write labels that don't really make sense. For example, commit time sounds like we're committing time instead of votes. These are small details that make a lot of difference if we improve it. So, how do we do that? The easiest solution nowadays is just to take a screenshot of your UI,

pop it into chat GPT, and then feed it some more context on the project, emphasizing that you want copy that is clear but short. For now, though, it's still a fail. But that means that we get a shot at redemption for the visuals. And here we've actually stepped it up. Now, we understand that visuals primarily serve a communication purpose, especially if it's a graph like in this case. And the red dot in contrast to the gray bars here communicates to the user, this is a thing we want you to focus on. Sadly though, we still think visuals absolutely need a trendy skumorphic effect with 45 layers of shadows. But it's fine.

We're still learning. So, a first half pass and we're back to the colors. As juniors, we have enough experience to know that mixing colors too freely easily turns into a disaster. We also understand that overusing a color could work against you if you want to assign meaning to colors. So, we're generally more passive when it comes to color usage, which actually is a very good thing. And one of the most important learnings for creating clean, professional interfaces, but it's a balance. Here, we went from a UI that overused our red main color to a UI that now barely uses any of it, which makes it a bit dull and therefore just a half pass.

In terms of font sizes, we still have issues. Too big sizes, too small sizes, too many sizes. It still happens at this level, understandably. So, sadly, it's a pretty quick fail here that segus into spacing and structure again, and we've made progress. But it's evident that there's still no calculated approach to how we space or structure elements. pixel values are still a bit random, which tells me that someone forgot to study the eightoint grid method, so it's a faily fail. That puts us at two out of five half passes. And while that might not seem great, we're moving in the right direction here. The design we saw isn't close to be worth serious money,

but things are about to change at our next stage, the mid level. Before we jump into that though, I'm curious. How would you score your own design skills? And how many years of experience do you have? Let me know in the comments. Now things start to get interesting. We have somewhere between 3 and 6 years of design experience, and we can potentially at this point rack in 8 to 10k USD per month with projects likely ranging anywhere from 3 to 6K. And this is clearly reflected in the design. The copywriting is now even clearer. There's a sense of it being written for an actual user. It still might not be the prettiest,

but it definitely looks better, which means that we have our first half pass on copy. But what about the visuals? They look good, maybe a bit overworked, which is something we usually see with mid-level designers. Just like beginners would add and add and add to the rituals, designers at the mid level can sometimes gravitate back towards that same behavior. At this point of their career though, they have a much more trained design eye, which allows them to make it work. So, while it's not perfect, it's clearly a half pass, which means we're stepping into colors with momentum. As a mid-level designer,

we know that UIs don't need all the colors of the rainbow to look good. We know how to balance the UI by using different shades or tints of one color instead of multiple different colors. If you want pro tips on shading and tinting, check out Eric D. Kennedy's article that I linked down below. Anyways, it's a good old half pass. And we're back at the point where the junior still tripped up, the font department. But now, for the first time, we understand how to use fonts in a UI. We have less sizes, have less weights, and while some sizes and weights might still be a bit off, it's starting to look cleaner. Half pass.

And onto the last point before we reach the senior level and the hidden mistake. And for spacing and structure, it's looking pretty good. Related elements are grouped nicely. We've started to use a spacing system like the 8oint grid. And as a result, the UI feels more professional. It's not entirely cooked like the young crowd might say, but it's definitely a half pass, which brings us to five out of five half passes. And the final boss. As a senior designer, you have at least seven years of experience, which means you have designed so many websites and apps that you're a safe bet for clients that want both beautiful design,

but also design that actually drives business metrics. That's why you will see deals all the way from 20K to over 100K from senior designers. Sounds crazy. Let's dive into how it's possible. First of all, the difference in copyrightiting here might look subtle, but when we actually study the words and the length of the words, it all just harmonizes so much better because as a senior, we find ways to communicate better with less. We know that we don't need to write last 10 votes when we have a big label right above saying voting or claim um if we have a heading saying um rewards. And by not repeating the same words,

we reduce cognitive load and visual clutter without sacrificing clarity. And I know that might sound like a minor detail, but when you scale this across a full app is a massive difference. So, we have our first full pass and we're ready to talk about the visuals again. They are now clearly made with careful thought. We add emphasis only to what matters and we help the user make immediate connections between different parts of the UI by reusing visual patterns. For example, here the commit part of the UI gets connected to the current voting period in the graph because we're using the same pulsing circle.

We're achieving more with less. It's a full pass. But what about the colors? Well, here we basically just simplified what the mid-level designer did. Instead of gradients, just simple flat colors. Instead of a button that screams error states, we're saving the red color for the graph. the rewards icon and the commit indicator. It's nicer on the eyes while calling attention to the right things even more effectively. It's our third full pass, which brings us back to the fonts. We're finally down to only four font sizes and two font weights. And you can see here that we introduced a monospace version of the font for big numbers.

And to avoid collision when this reward number grows, we reuse the heading size from the voting label for our decimal fractions. And that's all it takes for full passing again as we bring out our rulers. And dang, this is what we call structure. Elements are grouped logically. Spacing is deliberate between elements, inside elements, everywhere. Those seven plus years of experience are becoming really evident. Full freaking pass were five out of five full score. But what about that hidden mistake that even senior designers make? Well, I'm glad you brought it up. Let's talk about it. This mistake doesn't have anything to do with static UI or UX skills because as you saw,

senior designers are capable of creating greatl lookinging, well functioning interfaces. But thanks to AI, in the coming years, we're going to see an exponential increase in the amount of apps that are available to us, which means that designing memorable experiences that connects us with technology is going to be the easiest way to stand out as a designer. And the mistake most designers make, again, seniors included, is that we get stuck just focusing on static images. But to create a true experience, we need to treat UI design more like a movie. We need to piece static screens together in a way that makes the app a pleasure to use.

That's how we create truly delightful apps and as a result also drastically increase our price tags as designers. Look at Phantom Wallet, Airbnb, and even Dual Lingo. Those are all great examples of apps that have gone that extra mile, which raises the question, how do you achieve this? Well, that is a topic that is out of scope for this video. But luckily, if you're interested in a breakdown of these kinds of apps and how they create memorable experiences, I have a video on that here that you can check out. Now, until the next one, I want you to have an amazing everything and we'll talk


---

## 2. Every UI UX Concept Explained in Under 10 Minutes

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_Every UI_UX Concept Explained in Under 10 Minutes.txt` | **Size:** 10.2 KB

---

If you want to get good at UIX design,   you got to start with the basics. So,   let's begin.   This one's easiest to explain with an   example first. If I have three text and   icon pairs, but I put a container around   drinks and food, you know that they're   related and dessert is not. Then, if I   put a container around drinks, you know   that it's selected and you can toggle   over to food.

 And if I gray this text   out, you know that it's inactive and   clicking it probably won't do anything.   See how you just knew all of that? I   didn't need to write instructions on how   it worked because the UI was signifying   how things worked. Good UI has many   signifiers like a button press state,   highlights on active nav items, hover   states, or even tool tips to tell the   user what a UI affords or what it can   do.

  Now, take a look at this card. It   displays all of the information in a   logical, repeatable format, but it looks   like a spreadsheet, not a design. So,   let's give it some hierarchy, which is   pretty intuitive. We have size,   position, and color to use to our   advantage. Starting from the top, an   image always adds a great pop of color   and makes scanning super easy.

 Just like   Uber, if in this case the item is the   most important, we want that large and   bold and at the top because otherwise   it'll blend in with something like the   time and day, which can be below and   much smaller. And it's this contrast,   the difference between small and big, or   colorful and not that actually creates   the hierarchy.

 It's also why price   should be at the top, right aligned, and   blue. It's different than the rest,   which draws the eye to it. The location   should be smaller and below like this.   But instead of just from and to, we can   use icons and a line to demonstrate that   it's moving from Jamesville to Syracuse   without having to actually say that.

  Now, with that said, it's not an exact   science, and you could definitely end up   with a design that looks like this   instead. And it wouldn't be wrong, but   the same ideas apply. Most important   things near the top, bigger and colorful   is more important, and images are used   whenever possible.

 And as you start to   design more and more, you'll notice that   similar patterns arise when you need   labels or buttons, which we're going to   talk about in a minute.   Now, some people have this misconception   that all of your content needs to align   to a 12 column grid and be exactly 8   pixels apart, but these are just   guidelines.

 For example, this design   doesn't line up with any of the columns,   and that's not uncommon, especially for   custom landing pages. But for highly   structured pages like galleries, blogs   or any repeating content, they can   actually be useful for responsiveness by   giving guidelines for responsive   behavior on tablet with eight columns   and mobile with four.

 But much more   important than using excessive grids and   layouts is whites space. Letting things   breathe. For example, in a simple   section like this, the large text would   have a font size and line height like   this, and the subtext would have a font   size and line height like so. buttons   would be similar and optionally a top   announcement bar like this.

 Then simply   32 pixels between every item, but you   can also group elements that just go   together like the announcement and text   or the text and subtext which is just   another form of visual hierarchy. And   this is where we see the fourpoint grid   system actually come into play.   Everything is a multiple, not because it   inherently looks better, but because you   can always split things in half, which   creates consistency throughout a design.

  Typography is really interesting because   design is mostly just text. And for   picking a font, I can almost   unilaterally say you'll never need more   than one for any design. So find a nice   sans sarah font like the ones on screen   and stick to it. Over the last 7 years   of designing, I've rarely used any fonts   other than what's on screen, and this   shouldn't be where you're spending tons   of time.

 I'm also not a big fan of   calling any design skill a hack, but   this one kind of is. This design looks   okay right now, but our header text   feels a little too loose. If you tighten   up the letter spacing on this by about   -2 tog -3% and drop the line height to   about 110 to 120%, it instantly makes   any larger text look super pro real   fast.

 But hierarchy with typography is a   little bit more nuanced. And if we look   at our previous example, text sizes can   vary wildly. For landing pages and   websites, you generally don't want more   than six font sizes, which can have a   really large range. For things like   dashboards, that range shrinks   dramatically to where you don't normally   have text sizes larger than 24 pixels   because of the increase in information   density.

 But honestly, one of the most   important concepts of design is getting   inspiration and doing research from a   good source like today's sponsor, Mobin,   who curates hundreds of thousands of   mobile and web apps along with landing   pages, too. So, you can always pull   inspiration from real designs built by   the top design teams in the world.

 And   if you're struggling with a specific   section, just go and search for it and   instantly pull up real world examples   with links to the live sites, too. If   you're interested, you can check out   Mobin using the first link down below to   get 20% off. Now, back to the video.   Colors are difficult and everyone has   their own tastes, but I'm a big fan of   starting with one primary color.

  Generally, this is your brand color.   Then you can lighten it for a good   background or darken it for text colors.   Both good ways to incorporate subtle   color and make an otherwise drab design   look much more interesting. And with all   of that, we're already halfway to a   color ramp, which is what large   companies use to build out chips,   states, charts, and really anything   else.

 But I also think it's important as   a beginner to let the color find you.   Like an announcement bar to grab   attention or a focus state on an input   or a green new chip on a link. These are   all semantic colors, which are colors   that have meaning and provide signifiers   to the user. Blue for trust, red for   danger or urgency, yellow for warning,   and green for success.

 Make sure you use   color for purpose, not just for   decoration.   Now, designing in dark mode presents   some pretty interesting challenges for   us. First, this card is using a light   border, which creates a bit too much   contrast, so we'll lower that down. In   dark mode, we don't have shadows like   light mode.

 So, to create depth, we need   to have a lighter card than the   background. So, I'll make that   adjustment. This chip is also far too   bright, so we can dim down the   saturation and brightness and flip that   for the text to create some hierarchy.   There's also a ton of flexibility for   deep purples, reds, or greens, not just   navy blue or gray.

  But speaking of depth, shadows are a   fantastic tool to use on light mode.   This shadow, along with most, is too   strong. So reducing the opacity and   dialing up the blur helps a lot. The   strength you'll need depends on the   foreground and background, but cards   require less, while content that sits   above other content, like popovers, will   need stronger shadows.

 We can even use   these techniques with inner and outer   shadows to create effects like raised   tactile buttons. Just remember, if the   shadow is the first thing you notice on   a design, you're not using it right   now. To create strong designs, you'll   need icons. Most icons are generally too   large.

 So, the trick is to get the line   height of your font, in this case 24   pixels, and make the icons the same   size. And then tighten up the text.   Sidebar links like this are actually   just buttons without a background until   you hover, which are often called ghost   buttons. And if we isolate one and   center it, we've got a perfect   standalone button.

 These are super   common when you have a primary and   secondary CTA side by side. And a good   guideline for padding on these is to   double the height for the width. And   these can be done with or without icons,   too.   A good rule of design is when a user   does anything, there should be a   response. For example, every button   needs at least four states: default,   hovered, active, or pressed, and   disabled.

 Sometimes you'll need a   loading state, too, with a spinner.   Inputs are even more critical. You'll   need a focus state when the user clicks   in, error states with red borders, and   messages when something's wrong, and   sometimes even warning states for   optional issues. And this applies   everywhere. loading spinners when data   is fetching, success messages when an   action completes, even micro animations   on scroll or swipe.

 Every interaction   needs a response.   And that brings us wonderfully into   micro interactions. Micro interactions   are a form of feedback, but they set   things up a notch. For example, this   copy button has states and feedback when   we hover and click, but we still don't   know that we've copied anything.   Instead, if we have this chip slide up,   that's a micro interaction that confirms   our action.

 And these can range from   highly practical to much more fun and   playful.   Finally, overlays are really important   because if you screw them up, you're   going to ruin the image and the text,   too. In this case, we can't leave it as   is. So, we could add in a full screen   overlay, but it doesn't do the image   justice.

 So instead add in a linear   gradient that'll display the image then   smoothly convert into a text readable   background. Or if we're going for extra   fancy we can add in a progressive blur   on top of the gradient for an even more   modern look. And that is more or less   every UIUX concept all wrapped up in 10   minutes.

 If you want to check out Mobin,   it will be the first link down below and   you can get the link to all of the Figma   assets used in this video down there   too. Thank you so much for watching and   I will see you in the next one.


---

## 3. How I Design Apps 10x Better (Free Course)

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_How I Design Apps 10x Better (Free Course).txt` | **Size:** 51.7 KB

---

[Music]   There are a bunch of mobile apps making   10K a month, 50K a month, 100K a month.   And I've noticed that there's something   in common with all of them. They stand   out. So today's episode is a free   course. Yes, it's free. And today we're   going to teach you about animation,   interactions, illustrations,   iconography, widgets, and how you can   come up with ideas to make a mobile app   that is welld designigned, that is going   to stand out, that is scroll stopping so   that your mobile app has the highest   probability of success. Today's episode   is with Chris. He's a single developer   and he runs a portfolio of cash flowing   mobile apps. 2026 is going to be a   massive year for coming up with   vibecoded mobile apps. I want to see you   build one that works.

  [Music]   >> Chris Ro, he's back on the pod. It's   been too long. Chris, by the end of the   episode, what are people going to get   out of it?   >> Yeah, well, first, thanks for having me,   Greg. I think the main thing I want them   to get out is how to make apps that   stand out because right now it's never   been easier to make an app.

 There's   hundreds of apps coming out every single   day and I want to teach people how to   make something that stands out from the   competition. And we're not promising   you're going to make 10K a month, 50K a   month, 100K a month apps, but we are   seeing an increase in the amount of   people solo builders building these apps   that are generating life-changing   incomes.

 Um, and I think one thing that   they have in common is they do stand out   in some way. So, Chris, can you commit   to me that by the end of the episode,   you'll give us a few tips and that   people can take away so that then when   they build their own apps, they have a   higher chance of success.   >> Yeah, 100%. I can do that.   >> All right, let's get into it.

 So, I'll   give a re really quick intro just so   people have context. So, my name is   Chris. I build productivity apps. I   document everything on YouTube. So, I've   taught people how to build apps. Um,   I've also built a bunch of different   apps myself. The reason I'm sharing them   is it's not to plug them on the channel   or anything.

 I just want to show that   these are pretty robust apps. And one of   the common reactions I get from people   when they see the apps is they're like,   there's no way a solo developer built   these things. Like, they are it has to   be a team behind them. And I wanted to   show you guys that it is definitely   possible, but it is really only possible   because of all the AI stuff that's   happened.

 There is no physical way that   a single person can develop and launch   these and maintain them and keep growing   them without the help of AI. So, um I   just wanted to share this so you guys   know that I do have experience. Um   there's uh I think the biggest one right   now is Ellie, which is a daily planning   app.

 There's a couple thousand paid   users that are using this. I think   around somewhere between like 7 to   10,000 daily active that are using this.   So, it's a pretty substantial app. And   then right now, my newest app is called   Amy, which is a calorie tracking app.   And the reason I want to bring this up   is there are thousands of calorie   tracking apps that are probably coming   out every single month.

 And what's   fascinating about this calorie tracking   app is it has actually gotten a lot of   attention recently. And that's why I've   decided to build it. And the reason it's   gotten attention is because I have   crafted it in a way that it has really   stood out among the calorie tracking   apps.

 And we're going to go into some of   the details of why I believe it stood   out and how you can apply it to your own   apps. And everything I'm about to share,   even if you don't have a technical   background, you can 100% apply every   single one of these things with AI with   no coding experience. I'm very confident   about that.

 might just take you a little   bit extra time to learn and grasp some   of the concepts, but if you take the   time, you'll be able to do this stuff,   too. Let's go into how I make these apps   that stand out.   So, the first the first thing um there's   a couple things I'm going to share, but   the very first one, which I think is   probably one of the most important ones,   is animations and interactions.

 And this   is stuff to make the app feel more   dynamic because again, coding has never   been easier. Anyone can spin up an app   in 24 hours and people are doing that.   So that's why there's a flood of these   apps, but a lot of them are very static.   Like you can kind of tell that they're   AI generated.

 They're they're they're   vibecoded just like you can tell when an   image is, you know, an AI image or a   video. Consumers and users are also   starting to spot when something was just   a 24-hour vibe coded app. And so to   stand out and one of the tells of that   is or one of the tells that you can one   of the things that you can see that an   app is probably viodated is it's very   static.

 It doesn't usually have a lot of   life to it. And so a way to combat that   is by having more animations and   interactions. So I'll show you an   example of what I mean by that. Sam   Alman the co-founder of OpenAI just said   that it is the era of the idea guy and   he is not wrong. I think that right now   is an incredible time to be building a   startup.

 And if you listen to this   podcast, chances are you think so, too.   Now, I think that you can look at trends   uh to basically figure out uh what are   the startup ideas you should be   building. So, that's exactly why I built   ideaser.com. Every single day, you're   going to get a free startup idea in your   inbox and it's all backed by high   quality data trends.

 How we do it?   People always ask. We use AI agents to   go and search what are people looking   for and what are they screaming for in   terms of products that you should be   building and then we hand it on a you   know silver platter for you to go check   out. Um we do have a few paid plans that   you know take it to the next level uh   give you more ideas give you more AI   agents and more almost like a chat GBT   for ideas with it but you can start for   free ideabrowser.

com and if you're   listening to this I highly recommend it.   Um, so this is my calorie tracking app,   Amy. And the way it works is it's kind   of like Apple Notes where you just type   what you ate just like you would in   Apple Notes. And then on the right, the   an AI is actually going to search and   try to calculate the calories for you.

  And so again, this is a very interesting   take on calorie tracking, but when I   tweeted out this concept video, it   absolutely blew up. There were so many   incredible designers who were praising   it. Um there I think about 800 people   joined a wait list that I put up just   from a single tweet and that was after   like 20 hours.

 Like I just forgot to put   the weight list up like put the link for   the weight list. So even just on the   tail end of that tweet 800 people joined   the weight list which again is kind of   crazy for a calorie tracking app because   there are so many calorie tracking apps.   It's like the stereotypical AI app to   build right now.

 But this one did stand   out and I think it was again because it   was a bit of a novel concept. this   pattern of Apple Notes meets calorie   tracking, but also it's the animations   and just the feel. When people saw this,   it really did stand out to them. Now, I   want to show you the a concept that I   tweeted the day before of the exact same   app.

 This one had like a,000 plus likes   on it, like almost I think 3 400,000   views. This one had like seven likes on   it. It's the same exact thing that I   tweeted the day before. same concept   like you know you just type in like   Apple notes you see the calories on the   right but there just wasn't as much   attention to detail and the animations   and interactions compared to the first   one so you can kind of spot the   difference here like if we go back to   the first one you can see on the right   it was a very conscious decision to have   it say searching there's that little   animation with the gradient the sources   come down all of that stuff is available   on the right I just didn't take the   extra time to do it. But here it just   says calculating and it kind of shows.   There is a little bit of an animation   where it kind of subtly there's like a   little tint as well on the calculating,   but it's just not as subtle or it's just   not as good. Um, but that is the   difference between, you know, a tweet   that went pretty viral from my   perspective versus one that didn't even

  though it's the same concept. And the   difference between these two screens was   about like it was literally 24 like less   than 24 hours actually. I think I made   the changes in like probably 6 hours.   And again, just all vibe coded. Not a   single line of code was written for   this, but I think this is a prime   example to show what happens when you go   an extra mile with the animations and   interactions.

 Um, here's another one for   my budgeting app, Luna. This is Oh,   sorry.   >> Real quick on the calorie tracking one.   I got to be honest, Chris, when I saw   you tweeted this and I saw that you were   going to the calorie tracking space, I   was like, don't do it, Chris. No. you   know, having seen, you know, so much   competition.

 You have the Cali guys   doing like $3 million a month   >> and so many people copying it. But then   I watched the video and   it was just a like it was a it was a   breath of fresh air. That's what it was.   And I think that that's sort of the   lesson I I took from this, which was uh   even if you have a highly competitive   space, like hyper competitive, you   picked literally the most competitive   space, if you can figure out a new way   from a UI and interaction perspective to   showcase that information and allow   users to interact with it. Sometimes   it's, you know, it can go viral Tik Tok   X   >> and that essentially becomes your MVP.   Like you don't even need to like here   you were actually building this app but   like you could have theoretically just   you know created the video posted on X   see if people liked it and then went   build it built it.   >> Yeah. Yeah. 100%. I think you said it

  correctly like there's so much   competition here and this is a really   good way to validate it. The funny story   is this was actually me validating it.   So I I didn't even plan on building the   app completely. I just kind of posted   the concept. Uh this was just me for   actually a a throwaway project in 24   hours for me to play with Apple's liquid   glass.

 So I was kind of testing some   things and it just so happened that   people really resonated with it where I   was like, "Okay, I guess I actually have   to go build it." Um but yeah, that's   exactly what I would do too is just if   you have concepts, just throw them out.   You'll be so surprised. Um, but the   thing that does make things these type   of things stick out, it is the   interactions, the animation, those   details.

 That's what's sticking out   because anyone can code now. Like anyone   can do it. So these details do matter.   Um, do you want to move on to the next   one, Greg, or is this even? Okay. So the   next thing is um my budgeting app, Luna.   Again, an insanely competitive space.   The budget tracking space is so   competitive, but people really like the   app that I built because I spent a lot   of time on the interactions, the feel,   just everything.

 I'll play a short clip   of just some of the interactions   throughout the app, but if you kind of   get a sense that there is some motion   here, it does feel a little bit   different. I wish I could also convey   there's a lot of haptics going on. So,   that's when the phone kind of subtly   vibrates when you're clicking things.   There's some page swipes there.

 Um, all   of this stuff is really minor and and   even when you're watching this video, it   probably just doesn't look like a lot.   You're just probably thinking, "Oh, this   just looks like an app." But I'll I'll   show some specific examples of the   little details that went into this that   I think really did add up and make for a   better experience because people could   have chosen another budgeting app.

  There's so many out there. But the   reason people stick with this one and   the things that I'm hearing over and   again over and over again from users is   this just feels different. This doesn't   feel like a normal budgeting app. So   here's an example of the level of detail   I'm talking about.

 And it's something   that again you could totally just vibe   code and do yourself. It'll just take a   few minutes. Um, so one thing I did was   when you look at a lot of normal Apple   apps and just default apps, when you   transition between pages, usually it's   just kind of an instant transition. Like   if you're on your contacts app and you   click between the pages, it's just going   to instantly appear.

 Something that I   wanted to do was add a little bit of   motion when you're changing between the   pages. So if you look closely here, you   can see that the pages are actually   swiping left and right. And it's really   subtle, so a lot of users probably won't   even notice that this is happening. I'll   slow it down here so you can see exactly   what I mean.

 But when you transition   between the pages, there's this little   bounce and the pages are kind of   shifting over. That minor detail was   something I saw in another app. I don't   even remember what the app was, but I   remember seeing that and I I thought to   myself, what why does this just feel   different? Like this doesn't something   about this is just so nice.

 And I I   spent a lot of time trying to figure it   out. And then when I I literally had to   record my screen and slow it down and I   was like, oh my god, the pages are   transitioning. like that is amazing. So   this this is just one example of   something in this budgeting app that I   did.

 Um there's so many other things   that I did here that kind of add to   create this experience. This is the   level of detail I'm talking about that I   I think anyone can do. And again, the   way that I did this was I literally just   was dictating into cloud code and I I   just told it, hey, can you make it so   when we transition between pages, have   it slide over.

 And then I just had to do   a few more prompts to tweak it to tweak   the speed, the bounciness. but all in   plain English. This is something you can   totally do as long as you know how to   describe it. Um, another example is uh   dictation. So, this is my daily planning   app Ellie. We actually have this AI   assistant and you can actually dictate   commands to it.

 And something that I did   was I added the ability I added a little   bit more animation to the dictation. So   now when you click this icon, you'll see   that the the background turns black and   kind of expands from the microphone. The   icon here actually rotates from the send   button to the check mark button. It's so   small and subtle and like it needs to be   slowed down to see it.

 But again, it's   one of those things that when a user   sees it and feels it and then compares   it against another app, they will they   might not know exactly what's happening,   but they'll be like, why does this just   feel better? And again, you do this   across a hundred different things in   your app, it will add up.

 People will   remember these things. So they'll   remember the feeling of using your app.   And I think uh that this is just another   example of a small detail. And same   thing here. All I did to do this was I   just told Claude Code, can you make a   black background come from the   microphone icon and can you rotate the   send button into the check mark? I think   this one was actually done completely in   in one shot in one prompt.

 Like this one   I was actually very surprised that it   got it but it's because cloud code for   example is very well trained at   interactions and animations which might   surprise a lot of people like it is very   very good at this stuff. Apple has a   great animation library that's very well   documented and so it can actually do   these custom animations if you know how   to describe it.

 I think going back to   that one. I think uh I think you're   totally right on in the animation like   it's smooth and it's fresh. But I also   think there's a few other reasons why   this resonate this whole concept   resonated with people. One is you   created a mascot which we're seeing that   as a huge trend right now which is like   especially with AI first apps like   people see see it as like an animal a   person you know someone they're talking   to.

 So having that, you know, I think   helped one, two, it's voice first. It's   a voice first app. And I think that's   there's a huge opportunity to look at,   you know, I'm sure I'm sure there's a   ton of planning my day apps, but you   know, how many of them are legitimately   voice first? I don't know. So I think   you did that well.

 Third is you did you   didn't just have a text box that said   ask anything. You had contextual   buttons. you know, to get people to   actually engage, what's next, plan my   day, etc., etc. And I think that's   important because when users are looking   at a blank screen, they don't know what   to do.

 They There's a reason why Google   has the I'm feeling lucky button on   Google search, right? It's because they   know that sometimes people show up to   Google or whatever and they're and they   just don't know what to type in.   >> Yeah. Yeah. 100%. I I think that's   something that if you're especially   someone who's kind of just vibe coding   for the first time or making an app,   it's one of those things that's really   probably overlooked.

 Like they probably   would not put the chips here or or or   understand the significance of this. But   yes, that this is like a lot of thought   went into putting these chips here when   I coded this. A lot of thought even went   into what specifically should I put in   here. So I did study a ton of like Chat   GPT, Claude.

 I I studied all of these   apps to figure out what are they doing,   why are they doing it. Um but yes, these   details like it does actually not even   for the feeling. It has a direct impact   on the usage like people will probably   click these things and um there's just a   higher chance that they'll they'll use   it more properly if you have this. Yeah.

  Yeah. Anything else on this one, Greg?   >> Uh we're good. Cool. Okay. Sweet. Um one   more. Cool. The next thing, um, I'm glad   you actually brought up the the mascots   and the illustration because that is   going to be the next thing we're going   to talk about to make it really feel   like a more premium and just a different   app.

 Um, but one two more examples on   the animations interactions. Um, in the   in the calorie tracking app that I'm   building, another thing that I added was   this streaks feature. So, this is where   you can build a habit. Gamification   exists in Dualingo, even in Snapchat, in   a lot of different apps. Gamification is   a very powerful way to build habits and   increase retention.

 Um, I decided to   actually add a streaks feature here and   then for fun, a little badge that you   can actually unlock as you start   increasing your streak. And these were   handdrawn by my fiance. So, very   fortunate. But I'll also show you how to   make mascots like this using AI because   that that's what I was doing originally.

  But something that I coded which a lot   of people were surprised that I I didn't   write a single line of code for this was   when you unlock the badge, you can   actually click it and it's they're based   off of cat memes, but you can actually   drag along kind of like it's like a   holographic sticker type thing.

 It's   kind of based off of like Pokemon or   just these holographic stickers that you   can unlock there. This was completely   done by Claude Code as well. And all I   did was tell it, can you recreate a kind   of holographic sticker where I can move   my finger around and I can drag along   the sticker? And I was so surprised that   it was able to get this in, I think, two   prompts.

 Again, because Claude is very   well trained on Apple's technology, like   this was using something called Swift   Metal, but it is very well trained on   this. So, it can make these really cool   interactions, but I just don't see a lot   of people doing it, which surprises me   because I think I think people assume   that it can't get it cuz this stuff does   look very complex.

 But if you know how   to say it, if you know how to break it   down in plain English, it is able to get   these things. So, this was another   really cool example that I think stood   out to a lot of people. Last one I'll   show on the animations interactions is   actually one that was created. I was not   using cloud code or cursor for this.

 Um,   there's another platform called   anything. So it's I think create   anything.com. I wanted to show that even   if you're not using a tool like claude   code, you can do this in stuff like   anything and lovable and vzero if you   know how to prompt it correctly. So this   was just a fun 24-hour concept that I   made.

 It was another food tracking app   purely built with create anything.com.   And I added a bunch of custom   interactions and animations here. So   here's here's one that appears. This   date picker that appears that bounce   that modal completely custom. This   little sheet that says take photo   gallery enter text. This is these are   not components that create anything has.

  These are fully made by the AI and the   animation of it popping up and kind of   having a little bounce and a shadow   full. That was fully custom. That was   something I completely told it to do. Um   and this was me trying to push it and   see what it's capable of. Another thing   very subtle is I have this mascot of my   dog Luna looking at these foods.

 It's   very subtle, but you can actually see   that it's bouncing up and down a little   bit. So that's another very subtle   animation I was testing. But doesn't   matter what platform you're using, you   can do this in all the other platforms.   But the important part is just   understanding how to break this down in   plain English.

 That's that's the   important part. But I'm I'm pretty sure   all of the platforms are capable of   doing stuff like this. Um, so that's the   animations and interactions that this is   the probably the number one thing that   makes app stands out. And again, if   you're going to record demos or   concepts, that is what shines in these   demos and concepts.

 Like again, it's the   difference between this tweet blowing up   and then this one not is just it you do   you add a little bit more polish? Is it   a little bit more dynam dynamic? Um, to   go on to the next thing that really   makes apps stand out, it is as you   mentioned Greg, illustrations, mascots.   This is something I started doing in my   apps because of AI, because I'm able to   generate these things.

 And we actually   talked about it in the other episode   that we recorded before, and I have a   whole video on my channel documenting   how I build these things. But right now,   what I'm using primarily is Chat GPT.   I've noticed for some reason it's very   good at making these kind of   illustrations. And I think with the   newest models with I think ChatgPT5,   once it started with that, it got really   good at following instructions for   mascots.

 But my pro tip if you want to   make mascots and and here for example is   this uh AI meeting assistant app that I   was working on and it had this mascot   that people just absolutely love named   Lily the ghost. Um and what's cool about   having mascots and using AI you can make   almost infinite generations and   iterations on the same mascot.

 So here I   took Lily the ghost and I made a   variation where she has a magnifying   glass and she's searching. So you can   kind of see how in your app even an   empty state. So this is like a state   where typically there's nothing going   on. It just it probably for most user or   for most developers, they would probably   just put a a a looking glass icon or   something and it would just say type   something to search or no results found.

  This is a great place to put custom   illustrations to really give your app a   lot more personality. So that's what I   did here and I I just generated this in   GPT5. But my pro tip for anyone who's   doing this is actually to bring on or   hire an actual artist to generate the   first version or some sort of concept   and then use that and feed it into   ChachiPT or whatever you're using to   generate as a reference and say, "Hey,   can you kind of riff off of this style?"   And that's actually what I did to   generate Lily the Ghost. I didn't just   directly say, "Can you make a ghost   mascot with a flower on her head?" Not,   I didn't do that. Instead, what I did   was I fed in this, this was a handdrawn   illustration that my fiance did of our   dog Luna, and I told it, "Okay, can you   use this as a reference and now make me   a ghost based off of this?" It didn't   actually follow the illustration style   that closely, but I did notice that   there were some elements that kind of   was retained, like some of the shadow is

  kind of very similar. Um, but that is   something that that's a little trick   that I've learned is just if you pay   someone for some original art, there's a   high chance that the iterations that you   get will just be a lot more unique   because everyone is doing this right   now.

 Like I'm I'm now seeing a lot of   people using AI for illustrations. Like   this is now becoming a more common   theme. So to stand out, you will have to   either be really creative with how   you're generating these or again I would   recommend commissioning an artist,   getting some sort of first version done   because then at least you know it is   unique and it's actually cheaper than a   lot of people would think.

 I think you   can probably get an artist to do a very   first version for you for like $2 $300   or something. Um but then and then   obviously once you have the actual   mascot you can make infinite iterations   just like I did.   >> Um oh yeah, sorry. Go ahead.   >> Can we try something? I know this is   sort of off script but   >> yeah yeah yeah   >> can we go to chat GPT and if we give it   if we gave it a reference image of say   the you know Snapchat ghost   um you know the logo the Snapchat ghost   logo   >> I wonder if   you know let's just say you know we want   to create a um   actually with maybe with the the tongue   the tongue sticking out cuz has a little   more personality. I always I always   found this was pretty decent um in terms   of like the brand and so let's just say   we're we're developing an app   um and

  you know we want to we're inspired by   this. We want this sort of vibe but we   want more of like a 3D   you know kind of like how you had it   like yours it feels well is yours 3D?   Would you say it's 3D? Uh, it does have   some shadow. So, it does it's definitely   not like fully 2D. I think it is a   little closer. Like has some depth.

  >> Okay. So, maybe we say like we like the   Snap logo in terms of like its youthful,   fun, fresh energy.   Um,   but I want to do like maybe a banana as   a mascot.   Let's say, you know, I'm creating a a a   mobile app and I think a banana for   whatever reason is interesting.   And   I wonder Yeah.

 I wonder just how you   would prompt it to to get the most out   of it.   >> I think what I would do is I would say,   can you create   >> just follow the same vibe as the   original image?   >> Yeah. And let's just see what it does   here. Um, typically I do have to do this   a few times. So, I think to get the   ghost mascot, I think it took maybe like   10 to 15 different prompts, and I think   I had to tell it things like, can you   make it less cartoonish? Can you make it   more cartoonish? Can you remove these   elements? So, we'll see what this comes   up with. I have no I've never actually   tried 5.1. This is, I think, new as of   this week. So,   >> yeah,   >> I'm kind of curious how good it is. Um,   it might surprise people, but I've found   also that for coming up with novel   mascots, ChachiPT is actually better   than Gemini, better than Nano Banana   from Google. Um, I think Nano Banana is   very good if you want to make   iterations. So, when you have the base   mascot, but I am still finding myself   making actual mascots like the first

  version in chatbt. Okay, let's see what   it does here. And then let's see what it   copies. Also, another pro tip when   you're using chatbt for image   generation, the more you ask of it, the   harder or the worse it usually gets. So,   it starts deviating and then you start   getting that kind of chat gpt style that   you see in a lot of chatgpt images.

 If   you ask it to just do one thing really   well, it's way better at following   instructions. So, okay, let's see. It   did come up with a banana. Um, I think   it did kind of it did keep some of the   shadowing that's here for sure. It kept   the tongue. It actually kept also really   the same style as the eyes.

 Even the   lines.   >> Yeah.   >> Um are pretty similar. So I think it did   a good job of keeping the style because   that this is what we gave it. So it's   like it does seem like it's kind of   similar. Um but yeah, I mean we could   keep riffing off of there's like a   there's so many things you can keep   riffing off of it.

 Like if I say   >> let's let's do one more.   >> Yeah. What do you want?   >> Let's do one more prompt and see what   happens. I I also like I kind of feel   weird that we gave it like the Snapchat   image brand and likeness but it was a   place to start. So what would you do to   make it like different but also you know   unique and better and   >> I think what I would do again my my   advice is to if you can use original art   somehow or a combination if you use like   like actually let's just see what   happens here. If I just feed in I have   no idea what it's going to do if I do   this. Like if I feed in both this   handdrawn illustration of my dog and the   Snapchat mascot   of both the ghost and dog mascots.   Um I've noticed also when you do   combinations, you get very interesting   results. So I I literally have no idea   what it's going to do here, but it'll be   cool to see because we at least know   what's going to happen if we just did

  the ghost. Let's see what happens if we   do both. Um, but this is actually a way   too because I I think something that I'm   really worried about when I I made a   video explaining how I do this stuff, I   explicitly was like, do not try to copy   someone's style one for one. Like you   need to be original here.

 So definitely   if you're going to do it, make sure you   just iterate a ton so it looks very   different or again use original art or   mash like three or four things and get   the elements that you like from it to   get something unique. That that's   probably what I would do because I know   that if someone's going to do this, the   first thing they're going to do is just   probably throw in the Dualingo owl or   some logo that they really like.

 Um Oh   my god, what is this?   >> It's very different.   Okay, I see that it's it's it Okay, it's   more 3D already.   >> Yeah,   >> it looks like a lot more like you can   tell it has a lot more depth. It's   probably because it now has two   references of something with a little   bit more depth. Like this has a like   some more shadows.

  here. Wow, that is insane. And it kept   the bow. So now it has the tongue and it   has the bow from my dog. Um,   that looks insane.   >> Greg, if you use this, I think I think   you might get sued or something. This   looks like   >> Yeah, but it that's interesting. Oh,   this is not No, this is not it. Um Oh,   no. Here we go.

 Here was   >> comment banana, you know, on YouTube if   you like this logo.   >> Yeah. Yeah. If anyone wants to use this   as their logo, please feel free. You   have my blessing to do this. But it is   interesting to see the difference here   when you feed in one versus two.   >> Um it's it is already   >> Yeah.   >> I don't know if it's better, but it is   it is not different.

 It's noticeably   different. Like you do we got something   way more unique when we mash these two   together. So that's my recommendation is   just use GPT5. Um just throw it in. Get   really creative with it. Try to find   something that feels like you. But   again, don't don't copy. Just don't   directly copy anything like try try to   come up with a unique style that fits   the app.

  >> Okay, we can move on to the next thing   but I will say you were speechless when   when when that banana came out.   >> Yeah, that Yeah, that was that was   something that was something. Yeah, feel   free to anyone who wants to use it, feel   free to use it. Um, okay. On a note for   a a good mascot or a mascot that that   there was a lot of thought into it.

 So,   this one was not generated by AI, but I   did also want to show the power of when   you get a good mascot, what it can do to   the end experience. So, this was   something where um we actually applied   the mascot uh myself and then again my   fiance is the one who hand drew these   illustrations and she animated them in   Procreate.

 Um we threw them into the   onboarding for my new calorie tracking   app. And you can just tell that this   onboarding has so much more character   and life to it. And I have never gotten   so much praise about an app onboarding.   Like that's not a normal thing. People   hate onboarding. But people after I I I   think I've onboarded about 500 testers   at this point.

 I've been working on the   app for a month. This is the most   praised part of the app. Every time I   invite someone, they're like, "That was   such a good onboarding experience." And   there was actually one person who signed   up twice. They told me, "Hey, I signed   up twice because I I wanted to see it   again. I hope you don't mind.

" And I was   like, "Okay, that's insane." Like, I've   never heard of anyone signing up twice.   But again, imagine this onboarding if it   was just static images or if there was   no images cuz that that's what a lot of   people do. Sometimes they just don't   have anything cuz they're they just   don't want to put in the time to to make   custom illustrations for each of the   steps.

 But it does really add a   dimension where when you see these,   you're kind of like, man, what is the   next one going to be? Like, I'm so   curious. Like, these are so cool. Um,   here's another tip that I'll give if   because I think the thing that made this   stand out was really the the animation   or just like how it wasn't just a static   image.

 This is actually something you   can achieve through AI. Uh, and   specifically something that I've seen   people do is they use midjourney for   animations. So, that's something a lot   of people don't know. A lot of people   just think of midjourney as just pure   image generation. Um, this is the logo   for Amy the cat. And I wanted to show   what this could look like if you   animated it.

 So I just fed this into   Midjourney. And I'll show you what what   that looked like. But here's an animated   version that it just did in one go.   >> Wow.   >> Like completely. And just imagine you're   on the login screen or the splash screen   and instead of just seeing a static Amy   the cat, imagine if this is just looping   and this is just moving already.

 That   just feels like a whole that just does   not feel like a vibe coded app. This   feels like something way more premium.   Um, and so let me show you actually kind   of what this looks like and how you do   it. So people don't know this, but when   you're in midjourney, and this is what   the midjourney UI looks like, you can   actually feed in images as a starting   frame or an ending frame.

 And so what I   did was I just fed in this image of Amy   the cat. And then I think I just said   actually I don't even think I typed   anything. I think I just I think I just   like just clicked go. And then I was   curious what it would come up with. And   and this it did kind of get some there   was some weird stuff that came out of it   the first time I did it.

 But then this   fourth one was actually really good.   Like I I think I would actually use this   now in the login screen. So when you   sign up for my calorie tracking app, you   might see this in there. Um but this is   a pro tip that I've not seen anyone talk   about. It's using MidJourney to animate   very static characters or mascots.

 It's   actually pretty simple. I don't know how   new this feature is, but when I   discovered this, I was like, "Okay, more   people are going to take advantage of   this for sure." This is a really cool   one. Um, but yeah, that's it on the   illustrations. I don't know if you have   any thoughts, Greg, or any questions or   anything, but it   >> No, let's let's go to iconography.

  >> Nice. Okay, so another thing the next   thing is iconography. This is something   that I see a is just a that this is a   huge tell for vibecoded apps because   usually when you vibe code an app, you   don't really think too much about the   icon style, but it has a huge impact on   the app's feel.

 So, I'll give you an   example. This is my budgeting app, Luna.   This is the best way to illustrate this.   Um, look at the tabs on the bottom. I   chose specifically lined icons, which   means that they're not filled. These are   filled icons on the right here. Um,   there is a difference between these two   and it's very subjective.

 Some people   would prefer the left, some people would   prefer the right, but the key rule   though that I see a lot of apps making   is they love to mix and match these   things unnecessarily. So, here's on the   right where we mix lined and filled   icons. So, this is a lined icon and then   the others are filled icons.

 Um, it's   really small and subtle, but it is one   of those things where if you look at all   three of these, again, it's subjective.   Some people actually might prefer this   one on the very right, but personally I   really prefer the one on the left and   then the the the tab that's actually   selected can have a filled icon instead.

  So these transition to the filled icons   when they're clicked. Very very subtle   thing, but iconography is one of those   things where when you choose really good   icons, it really does elevate an app.   But more importantly, if you choose bad   icons or you're incorrectly matching   them or using different ones that don't   match, they're from different sets, it   really does decrease the quality of the   app.

 So, this is another one that I   wanted to point out that is such a quick   fix for people and for people who are   like, "Okay, well, where do I get these   icons?" These are three really good   resources to check out. Personally, I'm   using Hero icons for this set. So, I'm   pretty sure these are all from the Hero   icon set.

 Completely free to use, I   believe. Um, Font Awesome is another one   that has really high quality icons. And   then there's another one named uh called   Nucleio that someone put me on to and it   has a really good quality icons too. So   if you're vibe coding and you're just   getting started and you're like I don't   know what to do like I'm just using the   default ones that Claude is telling me   to use. Seriously, just try these.

 You   you will notice a tangible difference if   you just swap out all the icons, make   them consistent. It'll feel very   different. So that's another that's   another uh another small one that that   actually has a big impact.   >> And also   typography very important. Yeah,   >> similar thing. Small but big impact.

 The   sizing of um titles and headers and   subheaders, obviously the font you   choose or fonts, right?   >> Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. The the   readability, legibility 100%. If you're   just starting out and you've never done   any of this stuff, just just read just   watch a 5minute video on typography and   when to use certain weights, when to use   certain colors, how they mix and match,   how to make something more legible.

 It   goes a long way because people are going   to be looking at your app thousands of   times a month hopefully and so this   stuff will it will actually impact their   experience. They'll feel the difference.   >> I mean there's the famous example I   think of Steve Jobs going to calligraphy   class right at at Reed College and   that's what influenced   um the Macintosh   >> Mhm.

  >> whole font choices. Um, so   >> I think um to me I put iconography and   and typography in sort of the same boat,   which is like it's an afterthought, but   like it's such people notice it. Um, so   thanks for bringing it up. Let's let's   see what widgets.   >> Yeah, for sure. Okay. And the other   thing is widgets.

 Um, the reason I bring   this up is because with AI, it has never   been easier to create widgets or even an   Apple Watch integration. It's It's never   been easier to do this. And I'm actually   doing this for all of my apps. And this   is the widget for the calorie tracking   app, Amy, that I have. So, we have a   home screen widget.

 And again, this   illustration was handdrawn by my fiance,   but you can totally go generate this   with AI. But again, it does really draw   your attention to the widget. It's a   It's a really nice illustration to have   here and it makes it stand out. Same   thing too with if you notice there's   some background sketches there.

 Also   just handdrawn on an iPad, but you can   just generate these things. But in   general, something that I'm surprised I   don't see a lot of developers taking   advantage of is making widgets because   when you have them, number one, users   are always very delighted when they see   that. They're like, "Oh, amazing.

 They   have a lock screen widget, home screen   widget, or an Apple Watch app." I mean,   think about the apps you use every day.   You were probably so excited when you   were like, "Oh, thank god they have an   Apple Watch app." Like, "Oh, thank god   they have this." It's one of those   things that it's a it's a signal that   this is a high quality app when the in   the developers invested in a lock screen   home screen or an Apple Watch widget.

  Um, same the other thing though that's a   bonus if you are a developer for your   widget is people don't understand what a   retention boost having a widget is.   Because when a user is using your app   and they open their phone, there are a   thousand other apps that are trying to   get their attention, especially through   notifications, through other widgets.

  Having a widget and taking up this much   real estate on a user's device is   literally a cheat code because now   anytime someone opens their app, I mean   just I I it's overpowering the other   apps. Like I don't even look at the   watch app or the fitness app. Like I'm   very drawn to this. So if you are able   to pull it off and get a widget on   someone's home screen, the chances of   them opening your app increase   substantially, which increases your   retention, which increases the chance of   them building a habit. And then even   further, if you can do a lock screen   widget, this is the ultimate cheat code   because only four apps max are allowed   to be on a user's lock screen. And if   you can get one of those positions,   you're basically going to they're going   to see your widget like at least 150   times a day. every time they look and   they look at their lock screen, they're   probably going to see your widget and   then when they tap it, it'll do a deep   link and open. It's just such a   retention cheat code. So, it's a it's a   win-win. Basically, it makes your app   feel more premium when you have it, but

  also it just increases retention   dramatically. I I've applied it to all   my other apps. So, my daily planning   app, we have this widget that shows how   many tasks you have left. Again, custom   illustrations done for all the widgets.   And then same thing for my budgeting   app, Luna, to see how much you're   spending. There's a lock screen widget.

  When I implemented these things,   retention, I think it more than doubled,   I'm pretty sure, because of this, which   which makes sense in hindsight. It makes   total sense. Like people are just   reminded of your of your app's   existence. But huge huge one that I   would do. And then the reason you can do   it now is it took me probably four to   five hours to make this these two   widgets for this app because of cloud   code.

 Um, it used to take me, I think   this one is the only one I did without   any AI assistance because I did it so   long ago. I think it took me like maybe   a whole week, maybe two weeks to do the   widget. It was kind of painful to be   honest. With AI, it just the AI is so   well trained on Apple's documentation.   Like people have been doing widgets   forever.

 So, it can actually do these in   less than a day. So, there is no reason   not to do it. Take the extra time to do   it. It's just a win-win all around.   Yeah. I don't know if you have any   questions on on this one or any   thoughts. I mean, I'm a huge fan of   this. I think a lot of people   build apps, mobile apps, and they're   like, "Yeah, I got to 50K M uh MR, 70K   MR, but like the retention is so bad.

"   And so, you know, you said it best,   like, you know, these are this is a   retention hack in so many ways. It puts   it puts your app as a part of someone's   daily workflow, daily use case.   >> And I just think that for me, the first   widget that really got my attention was   the Locket app.   >> Yeah. Yeah.   >> I don't know.

 It's just super   welldesigned.   Um, producer Raph, I can put it up on   screen so people can see it. Um, and   then also like Jack Frics's new app.   >> Yeah.   >> What's it called? Love V.   >> Lovely. Yeah, lovely. Yeah, that's a   really good one.   >> That's a really good one. Um, and so   you're starting to see this resurgence   of of the widget   ecosystem and and I think people are are   more and more open to downloading   widgets now, which I think is also a big   a big deal.

  >> Um, I actually while you were talking, I   took a note of a startup idea that I   want to create for that that one of   those force slots. Yeah,   >> like there's   there's like there there's probably so   few widgets that are that are accessible   to that, you know, I just think there's   a lot of opportunity in a lot of   different verticals there.

  >> Yeah, 100%. Yeah. And again, it's so   much easier to build a widget. Like it   sucked building a widget before. It   actually sucked. So this was such a if   any reason to use AI, it's just to speed   stuff up like this. like this is the   difference between shipping something   like this and not.

 So if you're on the   fence about using AI to do this stuff,   please do it just so you can ship stuff   like this.   >> Sounds good. Did you have one more   category?   >> I did. So the last thing is just um the   most important thing I think if you want   to level up your design and level up   just the your ability to polish your   apps is to be constantly exposed to good   apps.

 So I just wanted to share some of   the resources that I'm using when I'm   just to get more design inspiration,   understand it. Um so Mobin is a big one   that I use. So basically it's this   massive design library where oh here um   they just have so many screenshots of   different apps and I'm constantly just   looking at this and I'm just trying to   get inspiration because there's just   such so many cool interactions and   animations and little things.

 You can   also get a good sense of like if you're   on the fence of what icon should I use?   Should I use thick or should I use the   filled or should I use the lined or the   filled icons? You can just go here and   just see what are other apps doing. Does   it look good? Does it resonate? Does it   have the vibe you want? So, this is   probably my number one design resource.

  Um, it is paid. Uh, I have a code. I   don't know if I'm allowed to share it,   but I have a code if you want to use it   um for like I think 20% off the free   plan of the year plan. But, um, 100%   just browsing this you it's inevitable   that you'll level up your design sense   because these are just such good apps.

  Another one is called 60 fps. This has   really good interactions. So, if you're   trying to figure out interactions,   animations, different things, like I   mean, I just like love how just looking   at this, like you can tell that when you   tap things, the gradient changes. I've   never seen an app do that.

 So, now I'm   like, okay, maybe I'll go experiment   with that in my app. And then the last   one is called Spotted and Prod. It's the   same kind of concept as 60 FTS. It just   has a lot of really good animations from   the top apps. And this is where I'm   looking to get inspiration. And that's   probably the number one question I'm   getting is just what am I consuming? How   am I leveling up my design? it's just   the these three websites.

 Like that's   the only thing you need. And then the   last thing um the last resource that I   have which um it's actually for   screenshots. Um and that's kind of my   last uh piece of advice. So there's a   there's a Twitter account called   Screenshot First Company. They basically   just curate and show really good app   store screenshots and they kind of show   like like here's a nice before and   after.

 Like this is what most app store   screenshots look like for actually this   is actually not that bad but this is how   most app store screenshots look like for   vibe coded apps typically for vibecoded   apps the app store screenshot is it's   like the last thing anyone wants to do   um you're like I just spent you know a   month or two months coding this app I   don't want to do these screenshots but   people don't understand how big of a   deal the app store screenshot is because   it is the first impression that a user   has with your app when they go to the   app store. And if you don't have a good   first impression, that's the difference.   Like there's no point in increasing   retention if they're not going to   download it. Um, for anyone who's doing   YouTube, um, I equate this to the title   thumbnail. It's literally the equivalent   of if you have a bad title thumbnail, no   one is going to watch your video. So any   YouTubers or anyone doing content will   understand this analogy, but um, level   up your app store screenshots. So this   is a great Twitter account. I don't know   of any websites that showcase app store   screenshots like this, but this is a   really good one to follow. So th those

  are the four resources. Like this is the   main stuff that I'm looking at.   >> Also, startup idea, someone go build   that   >> honestly. Yeah. Yeah, that would be that   would be I would I would pay for that. I   I like genuinely I think I pay for all   of these services. Like even Mobin like   I have a discount with them, but I I   literally still pay for them out of   pocket because it's such a good such a   good resource.

  >> I love it.   >> Cool. Um so that concludes this   concludes the you know how I make apps   that stand out. It's really just a   culmination of all these things. Chris,   thanks so much for coming on. I need a I   feel like I need a I need more of you.   So, maybe we'll record another episode.   Um I want to know about your AI   workflow. I want to know more about it.

  >> I'll include links to where you can   follow Chris uh on social um in the show   notes. And uh Chris, thanks again for   spilling the sauce on on the show.   >> Yeah, absolutely. Thanks so much for   having me, Greg. Appreciate it.


---

## 4. Designing Addiction  The Twisted Psychology Of Game Design

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_Designing Addiction_ The Twisted Psychology Of Game Design.txt` | **Size:** 17.5 KB

---

a while back I made a video about Apex   legends and what I felt was wrong with   the Battle Royale genre I received quite   a lot of comments on that video but what   in particular really stood out it got me   thinking about how games are designed   and the techniques used to keep you   playing to longer skill up made a video   back in 2018 which detailed the rise and   proliferation of the loot box or what he   aptly labelled the Wilson loop box they   represent not only an important shift in   game design but also an insight into the   types of experiences we're likely to be   playing in the future but lieu boxes are   really just the tip of the iceberg when   looking at how gambling has influenced   gaming now I'm not an expert on gambling   or in game design before I started   researching for this video I knew that   games were being deliberately designed   to keep you playing longer I have a   background in product design after all   but I didn't really understand how they   were doing this or how close modern   gaming and gambling has become in this

  video I want to take a look at some of   the techniques used to create addictive   experiences how many of these techniques   have been part of game design along   before loot boxes and how they've given   rise to one of the most popular genres   in recent years   [Music]   gambling and gaming has been a hot topic   of late which was largely jump-started   by the launch of battlefront 2 in 2017   two of the key issues in these   discussions has been loot boxes and   microtransactions and specifically the   type that provides competitive in-game   advantages now mobile and free-to-play   games have incorporated these types of   in-game purchases for a long time now to   the point where gambling has become   synonymous with mobile gaming but while   mobile gaming's nefarious monetization   practices have flown largely under the   radar   battlefront twos microtransactions   caught the mainstream media's attention   in a big way on top of being able to   purchase loot boxes that provide   significant in-game advantages with real   money that were also coupled with a

  well-known brand that targets children   this sparked widespread debate over the   ethics and legality behind them and it's   in many countries create new legislation   on the classification of gambling and   gaming while the war against these types   of loot boxes seems to have been largely   won this isn't the only example of   techniques commonly used in casinos   being applied to video games we've had   brief glimpses into the dark side of   game design in recent years in 2017 it   was revealed that Activision were   conducting research on how to   incentivize players to purchase micro   transactions but the use of manipulative   tactics in game design go way further   back than that   [Music]   so what makes a game addictive and can   you deliberately design that Jamie Gries   i'ma a former game design leader Bungie   famously said that the secret of great   game design is creating a repeatable   gameplay loop to hook players this loop   needs to be the central activity that   players engage in and it also needs to   be flexible enough that it can be

  applied across the entire length of the   game now hooking players isn't a new   idea or something exclusive to video   games it's a common practice in product   design with a wealth of books and   techniques on the topic products and   services don't become addictive by   chance   addiction is carefully crafted and   there's usually a team or multiple teams   responsible for researching building and   iterating on these experiences to make   them as addictive as possible   creating addictive experiences has been   one of the central objectives of game   design for a long time   arcade machines for example are designed   to suck up your pocket change as fast as   possible they generally have simple that   satisfying gameplay loops and are   notoriously difficult this motivates you   to extend your playtime by pumping in   additional coins the time you spend   playing is therefore typically short   which prevents you from getting bored   and it allows these games to be   reasonably simple if you've ever played   an arcade game on console or via   emulation it becomes really obvious how   brief these games actually are as   players got older though and is gaming

  migrated into the home a more   sophisticated approach was needed what   makes a gameplay loop fun and engaging   relies on many different components   working together successfully the   responsiveness of the controls the audio   design and the art direction are just   some of the more mechanical aspects that   go into it but equally important and   file is obvious is the use of psychology   a well researched and documented   psychological strategy for creating   engaging experiences and establishing a   pattern of behavior is positive   reinforcement one of the most common   examples of this is the Skinner box this   is where a rat is placed inside a box   that has a small lever when the lever is   pulled it dispenses food and over time   the rat learns that each time it pulls   the lever it receives a reward this form   of behavioral conditioning works equally   well on humans   to positive reinforcement teaches you   that doing a particular thing is good   because each time you do it you'll get a   little bit of satisfaction that little   head of satisfaction is dopamine that

  your brain releases to help establish   that the thing you did is good and that   you should do it more often   basically your brain rewards you by   getting you high there are plenty of   examples of this in game design with two   common ones in modern games and   progression systems and achievements   progression systems are particularly   good at keeping you engaged because they   provide a continuous stream of rewards   over a long period of time Call of Duty   4 is revolutionary progression system is   an object lesson on positive   reinforcement and unsurprisingly it's   been in every Call of Duty since the   problem with rewarding someone every   time they do the thing that you want   them to do is that over time it becomes   less effective they essentially build up   a tolerance not only does the perceived   payoff for completing the tasks decrease   as the reward becomes the norm but the   brain also builds up a tolerance to the   dopamine here that's been receiving it   so to establish a continual pattern of   behavior long term you need something a   little more advanced to keep the brain   stimulated and engaged enter the   variable ratio schedule sometimes

  referred to as the variable reward   schedule this is a very effective and   adaptable technique for getting a person   to continually repeat a specific task   here's how it works rather than   receiving a reward every time you   complete a task you only receive them   sometimes and never in a way that's   predictable receiving rewards at random   intervals rather than each time is   apparently a pattern our brains can't   get enough of it can be used to   incentivize performance in the workplace   encourage good behavior and children   fight substance abuse or in the context   of games keep people playing for long   periods of time there's probably a   really good explanation as to why this   is so effective but that's way outside   my level of expertise   [Music]   slot machines have been using variable   rewards for many years to huge success   they're so successful at this that in   2017   slot machines accounted for as much as   80% of all revenue generated in Vegas   casinos in the book addiction by design   problem gamblers were interviewed about

  their experiences with slot machines in   the hope to better understand why they   were so addictive people described   playing these machines as being in a   trance-like state where everyday life   faded into the background and they lost   all concept of time the book refers to   this state as the machines own and being   in the zone is what gamblers become   addicted to in many cases winning isn't   even the main reason people keep playing   it's simply a means of staying in the   zone the similarities between modern-day   slot machines and the loot boxes we see   in games and many but beyond this I   think the idea of this hypnotic state   where all sense of time and reality is   lost is the most interesting I'm sure   anyone who said just one more game only   to end up playing to the early hours of   the morning can probably relate to this   another trait among problem gamblers   that slot machines exploit is gamblers   fallacy this is where the gambler   believes that if something happens more   often than not during a specific time   period that the opposite is therefore   more likely to happen in the future so   for example if someone had been playing   on a machine without a win for a long

  time it might seem logical that a big   win will eventually happen in the   crackdown on loot boxes some countries   have demanded the game to display the   odds of winning in a bid to warn players   of the risk apex legends has even gone   as far as displaying the odds in game in   theory this level of transparency is   fairer because it tells you exactly what   your chances of winning are so how can   this possibly be a bad thing the problem   with knowing the odds is that you might   assume that you can predict when a win   is likely to happen let's say you know   that there's a 20% chance of winning   according to the odds you should win   every 5 turns or less except that's not   exactly how it works unless the rules   state that a win is guaranteed within 5   turns it could be far more than that you   see the odds don't state the time period   number of players or any number of other   variables used to calculate the win   ratio so there might be times when it   pays out frequently and other times   where it doesn't it's also worth noting   that unlike slot machines loot box win   ratios aren't   by law because for the most part they

  aren't considered gambling just a side   note if you're watching this from the   future and they are now then   congratulations we did it but right now   the rules are completely set by the   house gamblers fallacy is used to   manipulate the play into believing that   the more unlucky turns they have the   closer it brings them to a win   apex legends even has what they call bad   luck protection the guarantees that   you'll receive at least one legendary   item every thirty apex packs how   generous of them this further reinforces   the fallacy that if you play long enough   a win is inevitable okay so we've   established that loot boxes are bad but   this isn't the only casino tactic used   in games pretty much every game that   allows you to purchase items such as   microtransactions has its own currency   from fight money to shards to VBox these   virtual currencies are ubiquitous they   act in a similar way to casino chips and   while they might seem harmless enough   they serve an important role their   primary purpose is to act as a   psychological separator between you and

  your money their denominations rarely   match their real-world counterparts   which makes it hard to have a concept of   what you're actually spending for this   reason they are very conducive to   impulse purchases and spending large   amounts because it can feel like you're   not spending a little money   in-game currency is always purchased in   bulk amounts - meaning you typically   have to purchase more than what you need   this leaves you with a surplus that you   can't spend anywhere else   and unlike casino chips can't be cashed   in this inevitably results in further   spending when the amount you have left   over is insufficient to buy anything   else   [Music]   so we've talked about some of the   techniques used to create addictive   experiences we've also discussed what   these look like in practice such as loot   boxes progression systems and in-game   currency but these are systems that sit   outside of the actual gameplay they   generally aren't part of the   moment-to-moment action or other loot   boxes might seem like something that you

  only see at the end of a match such as   the ones you get for achieving a   milestone completing a challenge or by   spending real money but loot boxes are   far more embedded in the games we play   than you might realize from your   single-player games to your competitive   online experiences boxes that contain   random rewards and games are everywhere   one genre that has embraced this concept   as a central component of the gameplay   loop is the looters in looters like the   divisional destiny you're incentivized   to keep playing for the chance of   acquiring better gear which will allow   you to tackle more difficult enemies   progression in these games therefore   isn't achieved by simply completing   tasks or defeating enemies a certain   amount of luck is also required to level   up the amount of time these games demand   is usually high as grinding for loot can   be a time-consuming process skill and   experience can help speed up this   process but it still doesn't guarantee   you'll get the loot you want loot boxes   in these games are part of the game   world and often presented literally as a   box or some other type of container in

  God of War loot boxes are presented as   various types of chests that contain a   random selection of items not acquiring   these items won't prevent you from   completing the game but in many   situations it would be nearly impossible   to progress without leveling up your   abilities and items in a similar way to   how battlefront 2 originally integrated   loot boxes into its progression looters   use random rewards scheduling as part of   the core gameplay loop this adds an   element of chance into the actions you   perform while playing and it makes it   impossible to play these types of games   without experiencing some kind of random   the looter has been very successful at   using random rewards scheduling but   these games merely inject physical loot   boxes into the gameplay so how do you   take the concept of randomly rewarding   players to the next level how do you not   only incorporate this into the game's   design but build an entire experience   that's based on it I give you battle   royale battle royale successfully   combines all of the psychological   tactics I've just discussed embedding

  them into just about every aspect of the   game creating an experience that is   heavily influenced by chance right from   the beginning where you start is largely   random this means your chances of   finding not only a weapon but a decent   weapon is decided by the roll of a dice   scavenging or looting for gear is also   unpredictable   sure it's possible to know in some games   where high-tech gear is likely to be but   it still doesn't guarantee you'll get   exactly what you want your success with   taking out other players is therefore   heavily influenced by what bu found and   also what gear they found experienced   players will have an edge when it comes   to skill but engagements that everybody   influenced by chance as they are a   mastery of the controls in other   competitive games like Call of Duty or   Street Fighter every player has access   to a similar tool kit this prevents any   one player from having an unfair   advantage but in battle royale games   because of the number of randomized   variables involved the outcome of each   match is far more influenced by luck in   apex legends who you get two players

  isn't even guaranteed so the likelihood   of you playing just one more game to get   a more favorable roll of the dice is   high how many times have you thought to   yourself after losing around if only I   had a better drop or if I just found a   better weapon or more armor I might have   won that   now you might have noticed that I've   used Apex legends in quite a few   examples by now   apex legends isn't the only game guilty   of using the psychological effects of   gambling to help players it is however   an excellent example of all of these   concepts and mechanics rolled into one   product [ __ ] apex Legends has even got   loot boxes inside of its the loot box   style gameplay and doing well rewards   you with you guessed it more loot boxes   [Music]   I think that battle Royales mark an   important step in the evolution of   gambling and casino tactics being used   in games while there are a plenty of   other genres that use these tactics -   such as mobile games it's the way that   battle Royales weave them into the   moment-to-moment action that sets them

  apart this shift in game design towards   titles that leverage the variable ratio   schedule is what I believe is   responsible for the cancellation of many   single-player games and the closure of   studios that specialize in them it's why   so many game companies are turning their   attention to the live service model and   designing experiences that are hard to   put down don't have traditional endings   and most importantly encourage   additional spending there will always be   a place for games that tell a story that   have a clear beginning and end but I   think orangy experiences are here to   stay the mounting pressure on both   studios and publishers to remove obvious   gambling elements from their games is   undoubtedly a big win for players but   unfortunately this isn't the end of   these practices being used and is likely   to result in far more and city's   solutions in the future all we can do is   keep our eyes peeled and vote with our   wallets when it comes to the type of   games we want to play

  [Music]


---

## 5. How Addictive Apps Are Made

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_How Addictive Apps Are Made.txt` | **Size:** 11.2 KB

---

Everyone knows the apps you can't put   down have something special about them,   but nobody's breaking down the three   specific layers that make them actually   work. So, in this video, I'm going to   reverse engineer how they do it. And   [music] once you see it, it will change   how you build products forever.

  >> [music]   >> And just as some additional proof here,   we've tested this framework with   everything from App Store top layers to   AI apps with hundreds of thousands of   monthly active users at SIPAP. So, we   know this works. Now, let's start with a   pattern I keep seeing. Many founders,   whether they know it or not, actually   follow the classic double diamond design   approach when building a product.

 You   explore horizontally before going deep   vertically. And that's the most proven   way to reach startup success. But still,   most products fail. Why is that? It's   because they usually skip the specific   nuances that actually matter for   creating addictive products and   especially those related to the last   layer we'll talk about today.

 The one   that apps like Dualingo almost abuse to   keep people hooked. But before we get   there, if you're interested in chatting   with me about design strategy for your   own app, check out our free design   strategy calls in the link down below.   Now, let's start at the base that makes   the other layers of the three layer   framework relevant in the first place.

  Something I call the experience   foundation. To exemplify this, I want   you to think about ordering pizza. You   can have the most beautifully animated   interface in the whole world, but if it   takes half an hour to place a simple   oneperson order, no awardw worthy   visuals can save you from pissing people   off.

 In the end, people would much   rather just have the ability to say,   "Hey Google, order my favorite pizza for   6:00 p.m. tonight." And this example   encapsulates what the entire experience   foundation is about. Your app should   focus on helping people get their jobs   done as smoothly and as quickly as   possible.

 Again, most founders know   this. But still, here's where 90% of   them go wrong. Even the ones who have   successful products might be missing out   on millions in potential revenue because   of a nonoptimized core experience. So   how can we do this in the right way? How   can we nail that experience foundation?   Well, first you need to clarify and map   out your core user experience and make   sure it's the right one.

 This happens   before you touched any visual design   whatsoever. And it applies to building   an app from scratch, adding new   features, or even tweaking an existing   experience. Always aim to do this. In   our case, at Zips, we run strategy   workshops as the first step in every   single project. This helps us understand   the core problems and create a   comprehensive strategy.

 document that   informs our entire path forward. And   whenever we learn something new, whether   that's through testing or just new   insights from the client, we'll capture   it in this document. And having this in   written form forces us to a not jump   into visuals yet, while b giving us AI   ready prompt material that can be used   for anything from rapid prototyping to   ideulating new ways to solve core   problems.

 After this, we'll touch design   software for the first time. We'll   create screen maps where we outline   every single part of the flow and its   connected feature set. Then lastly, we   get into real visual stuff. Here's where   we create wireframes and prototypes that   we can use to hone in on the most   optimized user experience.

 Being strict   with this flow is key because it ensures   that we're building the right foundation   before anything else. And if you want to   see it in action, I have a video on the   channel where I go into detail on our   exact process. Or better yet, again, if   you want to talk to me directly about   this, check out the free strategy call   in the link below.

 Now, the experience   foundation helps us make sure we create   true functional value. But in this age   of AI slop where everything looks the   same, it's not really enough. If we want   to build that next level of trust and   conversion, we need to master the second   layer, something I call interface   boosting.

 Once your experience works   flawlessly, you need to turn your visual   interface into your trust badge. And to   showcase the importance of this, here's   a crazy fact for you. People make trust   decisions about your app within 50   milliseconds of seeing it. On top of   that, they'll continue to judge it   throughout your entire app's existence.

  So having a clean, professional   interface will signal reliability and   competence. And whether you're actually   reliable or competent, it will trick   your users's subconscious into feeling   like this is a safe place to invest   time, effort, and money. On the   contrary, poor visual design will make   people question your app.

 You see,   warning signals will go off in their   heads and you'll lose potential users   and revenue. The common misconception   with interface design is that it's about   shiny buttons or fancy gradients. So,   naturally, we end up copying trendy   designs without really understanding why   certain visual choices work better than   others. for our specific case.

 And   here's the bigger problem with that. We   start treating interface design like   decoration instead of a strategic tool   that enhances your entire experience   foundation. Your color choices, your   contrast levels, and your visual   hierarchy aren't just aesthetic   decisions. They're business drivers that   either guide users toward your goals or   completely distract them from what   really matters.

 So, here's what to do   when you reach the interface boosting   layer. Use strong, high contrast colors   strategically on elements that directly   or indirectly drive revenue. Think about   it like this. Your primary call to   actions should almost pop off the screen   while secondary actions can safely kind   of fade away into the background.

 Also,   reduce contrast on less important   content to create visual breathing room   for what actually matters in your   designs. And then design your visuals to   tell a story that guides users naturally   through your interface. You can use   directional elements, color coding, and   visual weights to create a clear path   toward conversion.

 Instead of cramming   every feature into view, use strategic   widespace and visual hierarchy to   spotlight your money-making actions. As   a rule of thumb, every visual choice   should answer one single question. Does   this help users see what they need to   see when they need to see it? Now, by   executing on the experience foundation   and the interface boosting in a good   way, your app should enter that top 10%   level of apps.

 But like I mentioned in   the beginning of the video, it's the   last layer that separates merely good   apps from addictive ones. I call this   layer emotional design integration. And   this is the secret sauce that helps you   create that genuine human connection   through a digital interface. Let's take   this super classic example of Dualingo.

  If you compare it to any basic learning   app, you'll see that they teach the same   kind of stuff, but somehow Dualingo just   feels more alive and fun and addictive.   This is because the Dualingo app is a   masterclass in emotional design. It   celebrates your progress. It makes you   feel guilty for missing days and it   creates emotional investment.

 Nowadays,   many successful apps and apps in general   are trying to do what Duolingo is doing.   Here's the thing, though. You don't   necessarily need to acquire a motion   design studio to get the most essential   parts of emotional design. While   Duolingo has the multi-million dollar   budget to create emotional moments   basically everywhere in the app, you can   still get lots of emotional design value   by simply focusing your efforts.

 For   example, when we do it for clients at   SIPs app, we pinpoint the moments where   emotional integration most likely will   lead to better business outcomes. So in   which parts of the flows does it really   make sense to add this emotional design.   Then we just design strategic emotional   moments based on that.

 And this   emotional integration is crucial because   we lose something fundamental when we go   digital. Think about it. In person,   emotional connection just happens   naturally through tone, body language,   and genuine reactions. In apps, on the   other hand, you have to design that   connection or it simply doesn't exist.

  And this is where most apps today fail   horribly. It's becoming more and more   apparent in the AI age where everyone   and their grandma can create an app.   It's super easy nowadays. We're in a   time where we treat users like robots   who just want efficiency. There's no   personality or emotional feedback in the   apps or in most of the apps that are   created today.

 And as a result, users   might complete tasks, but they'll never   form emotional attachment to the   product, which in turn increases the   likelihood they'll eventually churn. So,   how do you keep them from churning using   emotional design? Let me show you a   couple of recent examples of what we did   at Sibs.

 for free cash, an app that is   currently at number two on the app store   as I'm filming this. We introduced a   tiered diamond system with levels   designed to allow the user to keep   collecting diamonds, basically for   years. This creates a reason for power   users to keep returning and exploring   what's at the next level. Also, if   they're not careful, their whole   progress can go lost in a very visually   demoralizing way, which makes them not   want to do that.

 Obviously, with another   app, in a very crowded AI note-taking   space, we pick the most used part of the   app to reinforce their brand while   creating a memorable living experience   the user will interact with daily. So,   we picked an experience that is used   daily to reinforce the branding while   also adding functional value.

 And then   for a recent iOS app, among many things,   we frontloaded emotional connection   during the onboarding to gain that extra   bit of trust with a very trust sensitive   web 3 audience. And this is crucial here   with a trust sensitive web 3 audience   that we think about emotional design as   a lever to kind of gain their trust.

 In   this case, we need to do everything we   can to make them trust the app. And you   can do the same with your app. Just   remember to follow the three layers.   Start with the experience foundation and   make your core user experience better   than anything on the market. Then nail   that 50 millisecond trust test through   professional clean interface boosting.

  And lastly, introduce emotional   integration to create that next level of   stickiness with your users. As I   mentioned twice already, if you want   help with any of this, just sign up for   the strategy calls in the link down   below. Also somewhere around here,   you'll find the videos about Dualingo   and our detailed design agency process   that I mentioned before.

 Until the next   one, have a great


---

## 6. How Apps Are Designed to Keep YOU ADDICTED

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_How Apps Are Designed to Keep YOU ADDICTED.txt` | **Size:** 6.8 KB

---

Of the more than seven billion people on earth  there are some 2.5 billion smartphone users   and the mobile app market tops more than 100  billion dollars a year with a market that large   app companies have poured hundreds of millions of  dollars into keeping people as gripped to their   phones for as long as possible but how do they  do that and how can you escape their clutches are we addicted to smartphones well the problem  is our devices are designed to keep us engaged   they're intentionally addicting but if you  understand the tricks that grab your attention you   can learn to control your phone instead of having  it control you so how does this addiction work it   starts with notifications they used to signal when  another person was trying to communicate with you   like a friend sending you a text when you get  a call a text or a message it's usually because   another person wants to communicate with you but  a lot of today's apps simulate the feeling of that   kind of social interaction to get you to spend  more time on their platform apps like facebook  

and instagram will tell you when friends post send  suggestions for who to friend or tell you when a   lot of friends are going to an event by doing this  they simulate human interaction and pull you onto   their platform but notifications weren't always  this malicious when they were first introduced for   email on blackberries back in 2003 they were meant  to be a way to check your phone less not more   if you got a message whenever someone emailed  you you wouldn't have to keep checking your email   every hour to see if you got a new message  letting you spend less time on your device   but developers quickly realized how they could  use these notifications to use people's time   rather than save it a perfect example are games  like candy crush or clash royale in clash royale   you battle other people using your choice of 8  cards from a list of about 100 and you get these   cards from unlocking time chests it works the way  a lot of free apps work these days a chess will   take 3 or 8 or 12 hours to unlock and they use  these chests to send you constant notifications   trying to get you back on the app for starters  every time a chess unlocks every few hours  

boom a notification on top of that they have  daily and weekly quests that send you their own   notifications and if a friend wants a battle bam  more notifications having the game installed on   your phone you can easily get in the double digits  of notifications every day and that's just from   one app if you replace chess with harvest times  you've got farmville replace it with swipes and   now you've got dating apps it's a cookie cutter  formula and the specifics can be swapped out for   different apps and these notifications can be  personalized with what you're most interested in   an example android users may be familiar with is  the recent rollout of automatic news notifications   without having a news app downloaded at first  they're pretty random but by seeing which stories   you open versus what you swipe off and what  stories you read for longer your phone can quickly   learn what you're interested in and provide  content that appeals more to you so if you're   into the latest celebrity gossip you'll start  getting stories about that financial news mow   your speed well you'll get notifications for these  stories instead all personalized to your interests  

that's the secret of how these notifications  succeed the average person gets over 45 a day but   you probably didn't notice that that's because if  an app sends you a ton of annoying notifications   you're probably gonna turn them off or even delete  the app and that's no good for the companies that   make them so they play a delicate cat and mouse  game trying to send you as many notifications   as possible keeping you on their platform  without sending you so many that you want to   do something about it games like clash royale  manage this by having adjusting notifications   if you click on every notification in a day  and play a lot they'll continue to send you   notifications throughout the day but once you  swipe off on a few of them they'll cool off for   a while until they think you might be in the mood  again content libraries like youtube and netflix   that have treasure troves of content far more than  anyone could ever consume have had to master the   art of selective recommendations apart from push  notifications there are subtle features keeping   you glued to your screens most apps use these  bright contrasting colors to catch your eyes   and many have taken cues on keeping people hooked  from casinos like the use of slot machines to  

unlock items and games it's no coincidence that  the current fourth top grossing game is literally   a slots game so armed with this knowledge is there  anything you can do to free yourself from the   clutches of your phone well for starters you can  turn off notifications that don't come from people   that way you get pulled into your phone less often  another thing you can do is greyscale your screen   the easiest way for these apps to attract  your eyes attention is through colors   in eye tracking tests humans tend to gravitate  towards these bright and poppy colors   it's also why notification bubbles are often red  or blue the little icon like this or this doesn't   have the same impact on your attention as this  so you can neutralize that distracting effect by   selecting a grayscale color filter in your phone's  accessibility settings finally you can restrict   your main screen to everyday tools make sure that  when you unlock your home screen it doesn't have   anything except the in the moment tools that help  you live your life these are things like rideshare   services maps calendars and communications  apps that you can't fall into a bottomless pit  

of content on for hours at a time research shows  that people rely on visual cues more than internal   cues to stop consuming something in a 2005 study  individuals who ate soup out of a self-fulfilling   bowl ate 73 percent more than those great out of  a normal bowl filled by servers but those who ate   from the self-refilling bowls didn't feel any more  satisfied these apps work the same way youtube and   reddit never have an endpoint so you can easily  get stuck in them so you want to design your home   screen to avoid these distractions if you liked  the video be sure to let us know in the comment   section down below it really helps the analytics  on a smaller channels and don't forget to   subscribe so you never miss an upload have a great  day and remember there is always more to learn you


---

## 7. The Secret Behind Weirdly Addictive Apps

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_The Secret Behind Weirdly Addictive Apps.txt` | **Size:** 10.8 KB

---

There's a reason Dolingo, Revolute, and   Phantom all blew up, and it's the same   hidden edge I found designing for   startups and tech giants alike for the   last decade. It's called emotional   design. The art of making products feel   engaging, personal, and alive. And in   this video, I'll show you how to use it   to build apps people love and keep   coming back to.

 Let's be honest, these   days, anyone can build something fast.   We have APIs, no code tools, AI models.   All the ingredients are out there. It's   easier than ever to build things and   ship features, which means just being   useful isn't enough anymore. The real   edge is in how your product makes people   feel when they open it.

 Does it feel   smooth, delightful, playful, or even   premium? Or does it just feel like every   other app? Now, of course, winning   products still come from a mix of smart   things, like having a solid business   model, good timing, maybe even a strong   community. The list goes on. But more   and more, the thing that truly separates   good from great is design that connects,   design that feels intentional, design   that turns users into fans.

 There's this   quote from Reed Hastings, Netflix   co-founder, and it really nails the   point. The product has to be so good   people want to talk about it. And in a   world where every product has the same   access to tech, that's your long-term   edge. Not the code, not the features.   It's how your product leaves people   feeling when they close the tab or swipe   away.

 Now, before we dig into one of the   best examples of emotional design   translating into serious business   growth, if you're wondering how this   might apply to your product or your   business, we open up a couple of free   design strategy consultations each month   at SIPAP. So, feel free to sign up in   the link down below if that sounds   interesting.

 Now, with that, let's look   at Dualingo and how they used delight,   feedback, and character motion to pull   users in and keep them coming back.   Because Duolingo didn't just create   another language learning app, they   built a product that responds to you in   real time and in a way that actually   feels human.

 In 2022, they introduced a   full character animation system. This   included things like facial reactions,   lip syncing with audio, and idle   animations that made their characters   feel alive even when you weren't doing   anything. And this wasn't just for show.   Duolingo's data shows that after these   animations were rolled out, their daily   active users more than doubled from 14.

2   million to over 34 million within 2   years. On top of that, their paid   subscribers also more than doubled in   that same time frame. Of course, again,   growth like that comes from a mix of   smart moves like adding new languages,   improving the curriculum, running solid   marketing campaigns, etc.

 But what's   interesting is that Dualingo's own team   has highlighted character animation as   one of the major reasons people stay   engaged. On several occasions, CEO Luis   Vonan has pointed out that the app's   delightful experience, which includes   these animations, sets it apart in a   space full of dry, functional apps.

 And   that connection isn't random. These   animations aren't just eye candy.   They're emotional feedback. They create   loops that keep people engaged. When you   answer a question correctly or make a   mistake, you don't just get a green   check mark. You feel encouraged,   corrected, and even cheered on. Those   quick reactions help boost engagement by   triggering emotional feedback loops,   something that the UX legend Don Norman   talks a lot about in his book, Emotional   Design.

 But how can you use this in your   own product? Well, if your product   relies on repeated user behavior, like   check-ins, journaling, or habit logging,   add micro interactions that give instant   emotional feedback. A subtle bounce, a   glow, a sparkle. These little things can   make confirmation moments feel a little   more rewarding.

 Also, celebrate the   small wins. This will reinforce   engagement. Once again, you know,   success states don't need to be huge,   but they should feel intentional. Also,   if you're like Dualingo and you have a   mascot of some sort, use the mascot to   show expressions, to encourage users   because emotions are contagious. This   can be small nods, smiles, or animated   reactions that make the experience feel   more human.

 And lastly, if you want to   give the user a feeling of momentum,   include nice progress animations. This   can be anything like using motion to   show streaks just like Dualingo or   showing different levels, showing   journals completed, whatever gives a   sense of building something over time.   The goal here is to make the feedback   feel human, not just functional, because   that kind of emotional layer can quietly   build a strong connection between the   user and your product.

 Even something   super simple, when done well, can make   the experience feel more alive and more   worth coming back to. So, Duolingo built   habits by using design to make people   feel good about using the app. And that   feeling is one of the main reasons their   users keep showing up. But what happens   when your users aren't trying to form   habits? When they instead are trying to   get over skepticism? That's one of the   big challenges that crypto apps face and   the problem that Phantom set out to   solve with the help of emotional design   and animation. Let's start by just   dropping the bomb. Crypto UX is   notoriously clunky. And Phantom knew   that. So when they rolled out a full   brand refresh in mid 2023, they didn't   just change their logo. They overhauled   everything and brought in animation to   shift perception. They animated their   ghost mascot. They added playful

  animations during wallet creation. And   they put a bunch of effort into making   each interaction feel playful and   approachable. The goal was clear here.   Make crypto feel less scary and more   human. And it's obviously worked. Today,   Phantom is one of crypto's mostused   wallets, recently becoming the second   highest ranked app in the utilities   category in the US app store, beating   apps like WhatsApp and Instagram.

 Now,   just like Dualingo, Phantom's growth   rode the wave of market momentum and   smart business execution. But what   really made them stand out was how   design-led they were from the jump.   Their CEO, Brandon Milman, has been   super clear about that. This wasn't just   another wallet. From day one, the team   focused on polish, on craft, and on   building something that actually felt   good to use.

 In his own words, polish   matters. We're a design-led company that   takes time to craft polished products.   And that mindset paid off because while   most wallets were built by developers   for other developers, Phantom focused on   consumers. Their goal was to onboard the   next billion people to web 3. And that   meant investing in crisp, emotional UI   and animations.

 So when designing in   spaces that feel intimidating, complex,   or where the stakes are really high,   like finance, crypto, health, or   insurance, for example, remember these   principles. Polish builds trust. Treat   visual details, motion, and transitions   as core product features, not fluff.   Every little micro interaction is a   trust signal.

 Also, try to keep it   approachable. Friendly visuals and warm,   playful details make heavy topics feel a   little lighter, and that goes a long way   in building confidence. Build for   people, not just pros. Don't just assume   that users know the rules. Design flows   that make sense to everyday people,   especially if you're reaching beyond   early adopters.

 Performance matters, but   what really sticks is how the product   feels when someone taps, swipes, or   waits. Giving the users smooth feedback   is going to increase their confidence   with your product. As an agency that has   experience helping drive big design   results in the crypto industry, we try   to share some of our learnings by   writing case studies about our wins   every now and then.

 If you're interested   in that, there's a link below for that,   too. Now, we've seen how character and   delight create trust, but trust isn't   the end goal for everyone. So, let's   explore how emotional design and motion   can be used in an even more lucrative   way to sell luxury, which brings us to   Revolute.

 Revolute's been investing in   design and animation for years. But   what's super interesting is how their   design glow up has tracked right   alongside their push into more of the   premium space. As they've moved up   market, their visual language has gotten   way more polished and it's pretty clear   that they've been intentional about   this, aligning how the product feels   with where they want the business to go.

  Take the first time user experience as   an example. They don't just drop you   into a boring signup flow. Instead, you   get rich visuals, super smooth   transitions, and right away, it feels   like you're stepping into something   premium. I mean, even their charts   leveled up. You don't just look at your   spending data, you feel it.

 You drag   your finger and the graph responds with   this soft glow, turning numbers into   something way more tactile. The same   thing with their cards. You don't just   see a static image. You get a full   little 3D moment there. The card flips,   rotates, catches light. It's clean. It's   intentional.

 And it's honestly just kind   of satisfying. And these little details   like subtle animations in security flows   or onboarding provide that sense of   trust without trying too hard. None of   these design details shout at you, but   together they create something way more   premium. And in fintech in particular,   where trust literally affects how much   users spend, that kind of polish   translates straight into revenue.

 So   here's the big takeaway. Nail the first   impression. Spend time to polish your   onboarding. Polish your welcome moments   to immediately communicate quality,   trust, and care. Add subtle moments of   delight like animations, like fades and   hover effects or gestures. Build that   emotion and make touch points feel   intentional.

 Make interactions feel   dynamic. So, tactile charts, responsive   feedback, or animated cards that just   turn basic features into something that   feels elevated and engaging. Now, if you   found this video helpful at all, you   will probably love the video here   somewhere. Also, if you're building a   product, a website, or a brand, and you   want to find out how to boost your top   business metrics through design, well,   consider our free strategy consultation.

  The links still down below. Still down   below, still above law. Until the next   one, have a great


---

## 8. The Weird Science of Apps You Can't Stop Using

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_The Weird Science of Apps You Can't Stop Using.txt` | **Size:** 13.5 KB

---

Everyone thinks Duolingo is the gold   standard of gamification, but there are   apps that took the same [music]   ingredients and assemble them into   something that users genuinely cannot   stop using. Not because the content is   great, but because the architecture is   doing something to their brain they   don't even realize.

 And in this video,   I'm going to break down the three   specific psychological mechanisms   driving it. One that creates an itch   users can scratch, one that makes   quitting feel physically painful, and   one that turns the whole thing into a   status game no one can walk away from.   And by the way, I'm Tim. I've spent over   a decade designing digital products from   Spotify to startups that needed their   users to keep coming back every single   day.

 At my agency Sips App, we're   actively designing progression systems   like the ones I'm about to break down in   this video. Now, before we get into   this, I want to be upfront. These   mechanisms are morally complicated. They   can build better habits or trap people   in loops they didn't really sign up for.   I'm showing you the architecture.

 What   you build with it is your call. And as   we go through all three mechanisms, pay   attention to how they stack. This third   one is the reason the first two actually   stick. Without it, users can walk away.   With it, they basically can't. So, most   founders think gamification means   decorations, streak counters, badges,   leaderboards.

 That's the entry-level   version. The average app retains 7% of   users after 30 days. The apps I'm about   to break down are hitting up to 90% in   annual retention. The gamification is   the product. And like I just said, it   runs on three specific psychological   mechanisms. Let's start with the first   one, something I call the craving   machine. In the 1930s, B.F.

 Skinner put   animals in boxes and gave them food   pellets on unpredictable schedules.   Sometimes pressing the lever gave food.   Sometimes 10 presses got nothing.   Sometimes one press gave a jackpot. What   he discovered was that this   unpredictable reward schedule produced   the most compulsive behavior of any   reinforcement pattern.

 The animals   couldn't stop. Not because they were   hungry, because they were craving. And   here's the key. This is not pleasure.   This is craving. Variable ratio   reinforcement doesn't make you happy. It   keeps your brain in a constant chase for   the next hit. The same mechanism behind   slot machines, activating dopamine   pathways nearly identical to gambling.

  Duolingo uses a version of this. XP   after each lesson. It's predictable.   It's nice. But let's take a look at an   app called Finch. Over 14 million   downloads, 675,000   ratings at 4.9 stars on iOS, Apple's   Editor's Choice. It sounds insanely   wholesome, right? So, this is how it   works.

 You raise a virtual bird by   completing real-life self-care tasks,   journaling, breathing exercises, mood   check-ins. Your little bird grows up,   you're building healthy habits. What   could possibly be manipulative about   that? Here's where Finch enters craving   machine territory. You pick a location   for your bird from a rotating set of   destinations.

 Three options for free   users, nine for paid. You commit, and   then your bird adventures into that   location every day, potentially for   weeks. Each location has 15 to 20 unique   discoveries your bird might bring back.   Some days your bird finds something   amazing. Other days, nothing special.   You can't predict what's coming.

 And   here's the part that makes it stick.   Your bird develops personality traits   like confidence, curiosity, resilience   that evolve based on how you respond to   its adventure stories. But even the   bird's likes and dislikes for   discoveries develop in ways you didn't   choose. The app explicitly says your   bird is creating their own personality.

  The whole system tracks your bird's   evolving personality profile and growth   stage across six traits. You never quite   know what your bird is becoming. So,   your brain stays in that chase state,   checking, coming back, pressing the   lever. Now, to be fair, Finch does this   gently. You barely notice it happening.

  But some companies don't bother being   subtle about it. League of Legends has   one of the most sophisticated   craving machines ever built. Their   ranked ladder looks fair on the surface.   Win games, climb. Lose, drop. But   underneath, there's a hidden system   called MMR that shapes your entire   experience.

 Win more, and your hidden   rating rises to face tougher opponents.   Lose more, and it drops, so matches get   easier. The system is constantly   calibrating to keep you near a 50% win   rate. Players experience it as some   games I crush, some games my teammates   are terrible. But the algorithm is   controlling the ratio. You climb 100   points one week, drop 200 the next, and   then climb 150 again.

 The   unpredictability is the craving. And   over 130 million monthly players keep   pressing the lever. Have you ever opened   an app not because you needed to, but   because you just wanted to check? That   pull to check, that urge, that's the   craving machine at work. Now, the   takeaways for founders here are as   follows.

 Most of your reward system   should be predictable and transparent,   but somewhere in that system, add an   element of surprise, a bonus reward they   didn't expect, um milestone that comes   early. The best systems are mostly   trackable with moments of   unpredictability sprinkled in. Two,   you're not making everything random.   You're adding controlled surprise into   an otherwise transparent system.

  Occasionally, something delightful   catches them off guard. Three, track one   system users obsess over. Finch's   six-trait personality profile, League of   Legends' league points. One visible   measure of total progress creates more   engagement than 20 scattered badges.   Now, craving gets users to press the   lever, but there's a second mechanism   that prevents them from ever walking   away, something I call the infinite   game.

 Have you ever been on day 47 of a   streak and felt genuine anxiety about   breaking it? Not because the streak   really matters, it objectively doesn't,   but the thought of losing 47 days of   progress physically hurts. That's loss   aversion. Humans feel the pain of losing   something roughly twice as intensely as   the pleasure of gaining the equivalent.

  And the smartest apps have turned this   into an architecture. Duolingo uses   streaks, but a Duolingo streak is a   single thread. Break it, lose your   count. The streak freeze is smart, but   it's still fundamentally one counter,   one number. At Sips App, we designed a   diamond streak system for our client   Freecash that takes this a step further.

  Streaks don't just count, they unlock   diamonds. Hit 7 days, first diamond. Hit   42 days, a new one. Miss a day, and you   risk losing the diamonds you've   accumulated. The freeze has to be   earned. The diamond path isn't infinite,   but it's much longer than a weekly   reset. And each milestone feels like   something you genuinely earned and don't   want to give up.

 This connects to a   deeper principle, the refusal to create   terminal achievement states. The most   addictive apps never let you finish.   League of Legends resets its ranked   ladder every season. 5 hours climbing to   platinum, then you drop back down to   gold when the season flips. There is no   winning in these systems.

 There's only   more. And here's the case study that   proves this outside of game, Peloton.   90% annual subscriber retention. Listen   to that. That's insane. Not because of   the $1,700 bike. The real retention   engine is the community. Live   leaderboards ranking your watts output   against thousands of riders in real   time. Monthly challenges.

 Instructors   who call out top performers by name. And   accumulated metrics that never cap out.   Total classes, total miles, total   output. A user at 500 classes isn't   stopping when 600, 700, 1,000 or all   theoretically reachable. If you're a   founder, take this with you. One, audit   your product for done states.

 If a user   can complete your app, you have a   ceiling on retention. Two, build streaks   that compound into something, not just   numbers that reset. Make streaks unlock   tangible value that the user doesn't   want to lose. And three, if your product   has levels, consider periodic resets   that force re-engagement while   preserving earned status.

 League resets   rank, but keeps honor levels and   cosmetics. That balance is key. Now,   quick note, if designing this kind of   progression system sounds valuable, but   you're not really sure where to start,   at Sips App, we run free design strategy   sessions focused on exactly this kind of   retention architecture.

 Link's down   below if you want to grab a spot. So,   craving keeps users engaged, and the   infinite game prevents them from   leaving. But the third mechanism makes   these systems truly inescapable. This   one I call the invisible scoreboard. As   humans, we have a deep instinct to   compare ourselves to other people.   Someone checks their fitness tracker not   for their own steps, but to see how they   stack up against a friend.

 That's social   comparison theory. And the most   addictive apps don't just enable it.   They build their entire experience   around it. Strava has over 180 million   registered athletes competing on   segments, specific routes ranked by   fastest time. The leaderboard is so   powerful that in 2025 and early 2026,   Strava had to delete 3.

9 million   activities because users were gaming the   system. People were uploading e-bike   rides as regular bike rides just to   climb the rankings. We're talking about   no prize money, no sponsorship, no   financial reward whatsoever. Users were   willing to manipulate the results over a   position on a leaderboard that gives   them nothing but bragging rights.

 That   tells you everything about the force of   social comparison. Now, Peloton takes   this further with parasocial   relationships. Instructors like Cody   Rigsby and Ally Love have become   celebrities. Users attend classes to see   their instructor. They even follow the   instructor's life updates. This   emotional bond transforms Peloton from a   fitness tool into a social community.

  And here's the insight. In an age where   AI can replicate almost any feature, the   combination of gamification and real   human connection creates an unbreakable   moat. AI can generate a workout plan. AI   can build a leaderboard, but AI can't   replace the feeling of Cody yelling,   "You're doing great there, Tim.

" when   I'm struggling at number 42 on the   leaderboard. The scoreboard creates the   competition. The human connection makes   it matter. You need both. Now, when   progression becomes a status symbol,   social comparison kicks in   automatically. And this is what I teased   at the beginning. The invisible   scoreboard is the mechanism that makes   the other two permanently irreversible.

  Think about it. Without social   visibility, a user can quit the craving   machine privately. They can break their   infinite game streak and nobody knows.   But the moment their progression is   visible on a leaderboard, the moment   their diamond tier is a status symbol   others can see, quitting stops being   about losing progress.

 It becomes about   publicly admitting you stopped. The   social layer turns engagement into   identity. And identity is the one thing   people never voluntarily walk away from.   This is what founders should care about   more than anything else in their   retention stack. The craving machine   gets users through the door. The   infinite game keeps them running.

 But   the invisible scoreboard is what makes   them never want to be seen standing   still. So, remember. One, make   achievements visible to others. Social   visibility transforms personal goals   into status goals. Two, build community   dynamics, not just features. Peloton   proves human connection amplifies   gamification in ways that mechanics   alone can't match.

 Three, design your   metrics as a mirror, not just a report.   When users see their stats, they should   immediately think about how they compare   to other people. Now, the TLDR for any   founder watching this. We talked about   three things. The craving machine,   unpredictable rewards that keep users   chasing.

 Not a vending machine, but a   system where the next hit could come on   the very next action or 10 actions from   now. The infinite game, loss aversion,   and the refusal to let users finish.   Streaks that compound into something   worth keeping. A product that never says   you're done. And lastly, the invisible   scoreboard, social comparison that turns   engagement into a status game and locks   the other two mechanisms in place   permanently. One core truth.

 It's not   what these apps reward, it's how they   structure the reward. The difference   between a Duolingo streak and a full   progression addiction system is the   difference between decoration and   architecture. Now, if you found this   breakdown useful and you're thinking   about how to apply these principles for   your own app, for the last time, we open   up a few free design strategy calls each   month at ZipZap. Link's down below.

 And   also, check out this video here   somewhere where I break down the   emotional design layer, the psychology   that gets users in the door before   progression keeps them locked in. Now,   until the next one, have a great life.


---

## 9. How to Make Learning as Addictive as Social Media   Duolingo's Luis Von Ahn   TED

**Source File:** `VideoTranscriber_How to Make Learning as Addictive as Social Media _ Duolingo's Luis Von Ahn _ TED.txt` | **Size:** 12.9 KB

---

So, I'm from Guatemala. This is a public service announcement, that is where Guatemala is. (Laughter) Also, that is not where they keep the prisoners. That is called Guantanamo. (Laughter) Not the same place. So Guatemala's right below Mexico. And for the Americans in the audience, and let this sink in, because it really applies in most ways, for the Americans in the audience, you can think of it as Mexico's Mexico.

(Laughter) Just like the US doesn't want illegal immigration from Mexico, Mexico doesn't want illegal immigration from Guatemala. It's a smaller country. It's a poor country. And well, what can I tell you, it has much better Mexican food. (Laughter) Guatemala is a very poor country. And a lot of people talk about education as something that brings equality to different social classes.

But I always saw it as the opposite, as something that brings inequality. Because what happens in practice is that people who have a lot of money can buy themselves a really good education and therefore continue having a lot of money. Whereas people who don't have very much money barely learn how to read and write and therefore never make a lot of money.

And this is especially true in poor countries. Now, I was fortunate that I received a rich person's education even though I didn't grow up rich. And it’s because I’m an only child. And my mother, who was a single mother, spent all of her resources on my education. And this allowed me to come to college to the US and eventually get a PhD in computer science.

Now because of all of this about 10 years ago, I decided I wanted to do something that would give equal access to education to everyone. Oh, by the way, this is what I want to talk to you about today, giving equal access to education to everyone. At the time, I was a professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University, and I decided to work on this with my PhD student, Severin.

The way my brain works, all of education is just too general of a problem. So I decided, let's start by teaching one thing. And then I started thinking, OK, well, what should we teach first? Should we teach math? I mean, we both love math. Me and my cofounder, we both love math. And, you know, we didn't decide to do math.

Then we started thinking, well, maybe we should teach computer science. But eventually, and this is maybe surprising to people in North America, eventually, we decided that the best subject to start with was teaching foreign languages. And let me tell you why. There's a number of reasons. One of them is that there's a huge audience for it.

There’s about two billion people in the world learning a foreign language, both in school and outside of schools. Most of these people, by the way, are learning English. About 80 percent of them are learning English. In this weird map right here, all the countries in green are countries in which people are predominantly learning English.

And the reason for that is because English can truly transform your life. In most countries in the world, knowledge of English can significantly increase your income potential. So this is another reason why we decided to start with foreign languages. And it's because you can directly make more money if you learn another language, in particular English.

And see, this is pretty different than many other subjects. For example, take math. In the case of math, just knowledge of math does not increase your income potential because usually you have to learn math to then learn physics to then become a civil engineer, that's how you make more money. Whereas with languages, if you are a waiter and you learn English, now you can be a waiter at a hotel and make more money.

So we decided, well, let's get started by teaching languages. Now, we also convinced ourselves that the only way to really reach a lot of people was by using a mobile phone, or a smartphone in particular. See, building schools all over the world is simply too expensive. On the other hand, most of the world's population already has access to a smartphone, and the trend is that that fraction is only going to increase.

So we decided at the time that we would make a way to learn foreign languages on a mobile phone that was accessible to everyone. And then we called it Duolingo. Thank you. (Applause) Now in order to truly be accessible to everyone, rich and poor, Duolingo uses a freemium model to support itself. What that means is that you can learn as much as you want without ever having to pay.

But if you don't pay, you may have to see an ad at the end of a lesson. Now, if you don't like ads, you can also pay to subscribe to turn off the ads. And it turns out that the vast majority of the revenue for Duolingo comes from people who pay to subscribe to turn off the ads. Now, who are these people who pay to subscribe to turn off the ads? Well, they're usually well-off people in rich countries like the US and Canada.

Who are the people who don't pay to subscribe? They usually come from poorer countries like Brazil or Vietnam or Guatemala. So what I like about this model is that it is a small form of wealth redistribution because we're basically getting the rich people to pay for the education of everyone. So I like that.

(Applause) So with smartphones, we can reach a lot of people and we can even get the rich people to pay for the whole thing, which is great. However, if you're trying to deliver education with a smartphone, you run into a humongous problem. And it is that smartphones come equipped with some of the most addictive drugs that humanity has ever engineered.

TikTok, Instagram, mobile games. See, delivering education over a smartphone is like hoping that people will eat their broccoli, but right next to it, you put the most delicious dessert ever made. (Laughter) If you really want to deliver education to everyone, not only do you have to make it accessible, but also you have to make it so that people want to actually learn.

And with Duolingo, we've been able to do this. And at the highest level, the way we've done this is by making the broccoli taste like dessert. I'll say it another way. What we've done is that we've used the same psychological techniques that apps like Instagram, TikTok or mobile games use to keep people engaged, but in this case, we use them to keep people engaged but with education.

Let me give you some examples of these techniques. One of the most powerful ones is the notion of a streak. What a streak is, is it’s just a counter that measures the number of days that you've used the product consecutively. You just take that number, you put it very prominently in your product and then people come back every day.

And the reason people come back every day is because, well, if they don't come back, that number resets to zero and people don't want to lose their streak. It works. Now, on the one side, streaks have been criticized for, for example, getting teens addicted to Snapchat. But in the case of an educational app, streaks get people to come back to study every day.

Now, to give you an idea of the power of streaks, in the case of Duolingo, we have over three million daily active users that have a streak longer than 365. (Applause) That means they haven't missed a day in the last year or longer. Now, fun fact about streaks. What country do you think has the longest average streaks for an educational app? It's Japan.

Of course. Shortest-ever streaks? Latin America, baby. (Laughter) But we're fun, hey, we're fun. (Laughter) Another important mechanism to get people to come back to your product are notifications. On the one side, notifications can be really spammy and annoying, but in the case of an educational product, people actually want to be reminded to learn.

In the case of Duolingo, we have a very sophisticated AI system that basically chooses when to send the notification and also what to say in each notification to maximize the probability that people come back. Now, interestingly, even after all this sophistication, it turns out that the algorithm for choosing what time to send you a notification is pretty simple.

Do you know what is the best time to send people a notification? I'll tell you. It's 24 hours after they used the product last. There's an easy explanation. If you were free yesterday at 3pm, you’re probably free today at 3pm as well. So this is what a very sophisticated millions of dollars of AI found. (Laughter) It's funny.

Now with notifications you shouldn't be spamming. And we're not spamming, with Duolingo, we actually stop sending notifications after seven days of inactivity. So if you don't use Duolingo for seven days, we stop sending you notifications. Now, at some point it occurred to us, if we're stopping to send people notifications, we should let them know.

So we started sending this notification to people saying, "Hey, these reminders don't seem to be working. We'll stop sending them for now." You know what people do when they get this notification? They come back. (Laughter) Passive aggressive. (Laughter) Works for my mother, works for Duolingo. (Laughter and applause) These passive aggressive notifications are really good at getting people to come back back because they feel like our green owl mascot has given up on them, so they come back.

And speaking of our green owl mascot, by the way, because all our notifications come from our green owl mascot and well, he's passive aggressive and also pretty pushy, this has given rise to a lot of memes on the internet that make fun of the great lengths that he will go through to get you back to learn a language.

Here's one of my favorite ones. This is it's a meme, it’s one of my favorite ones. (Laughter) Basically looks like you forgot your Spanish lessons. And then there's an intruder alert, presumably the owl broke into your house to get you to learn language. Now, Duolingo has entered the zeitgeist. And there's thousands of memes, there's SNL skits about it.

And it's because we've managed to get people to want to learn a language by using the same techniques that mobile games and social media use to get people engaged. And this is a really important point, let me say this. I don't actually believe that there's a way to make an educational app be as engaging as something like TikTok or Instagram or mobile games.

But the good news is that -- And by the way, the reason I don't believe that is because ultimately you have to teach people something. And it's hard to compete with, like, cats and celebrities. But the good news is that I don't think you have to. See, here's the thing. When you're learning something, you get meaning out of it.

Whereas when you're scrolling for two hours on Instagram, a lot of times afterwards, you feel like you just wasted your time. So I think it's actually OK if your educational product is only 80 or 90 percent as engaging as something like TikTok, because the other 10 or 20 percent will be provided by people's internal motivation, though of course, not much more than that.

This is really a key point. If we want to get people to do something meaningful, you can use the same techniques that apps like social media use to get people to do it. And even if you're not as engaging as those apps are, you can still get hundreds of millions of people to use your product. In the case of Duolingo, for example, there are more people learning languages on Duolingo in the United States than there are people learning languages across all US high schools combined.

(Applause) And this is true in most countries in the world. My hope is that -- I know we can do this, but, you know, my hope is that as humanity, we can do what Duolingo has done for learning languages but for all other subjects. Where we can get people to learn math with mobile phones, like millions of people to learn math with mobile phones or physics or whatever.

I hope for a future in which screen time is not a bad thing, in which we can deliver high-quality education to everyone, rich or poor, using a mobile phone. But the single most important thing that I can end this talk with, is a reminder to please, pretty please, I beg you, do your language lessons today.

Thank you very much. (Laughter) Thank you. (Applause) Helen Walters: Luis, thank you so much. I wonder if you can just say a little bit more about that last point, how do you think you can apply this type of thinking to other subjects? So you mentioned math, and things like that. How do you do that? Luis von Ahn: I think in particular, subjects that are learned through repetition and it turns out most things that are kind of really meaningful are learned through thousands of repetitions.

You learn to read through repetition, you learn elementary school math through repetition. Most things that you can learn through repetition, you can actually gamify and turn into something like Duolingo, where people just do it a lot and do it fun. It's a little harder for things like explanations. That probably is going to require some really good videos.

Sal Khan is doing a really good job with that. But for things that require a lot of repetition, I think we can use the same methods. (Applause)

